Myths and taboos often make little sense to outsiders, and some of them are surely misguided, even counterproductive for those who honor them. Some surprisingly precise taboos are likely overgeneralizations from an actual event. Among the Camayura of the Brazilian Amazon, the eating of scaleless fish is forbidden for both pregnant women and their husbands.9 It may well be that, long ago, a terrible fate befell a woman, her unborn child, or her entire family, after eating a fish without scales, and that the fish was the only explanation that stuck. Similarly, on the haut plateau of Madagascar, in the village of Mahatsinjo, there is a taboo against eating hamerkops, a close relative of pelicans. This taboo is directly tied to villagers having seen one fly over just as a man died.10 Elsewhere in Madagascar, it is taboo for young men to eat mutton before wooing; taboo for pregnant women to eat the meat of hedgehogs, or to walk through fields of pumpkin; taboo for a son to build his home to the north or east of his father’s house.11 To our Western sensibilities, this seems like superstition, pure and simple.

  

We predict that those taboos that have lasted the longest are most likely to be hiding an important cultural truth in plain sight. Beware Chesterton’s _fadys_—the old ideas may have hidden truths, and those truths may be difficult to recover once they have been dismissed.

Malagasy _fadys_ come cloaked in the language of gods and ancestors, but it is still easy to see the wisdom in many of them if you simply look at the prohibition: Do not build a house over or against a new landslide. Do not step on a dead dog, as you might get hydrophobia (rabies). Do not divorce your wife while she is pregnant.13

The word for taboo in Malagasy—_fady_—has a complex meaning as well. In Betsimisaraka, the language of the people of northeastern Madagascar, _fady_ means both taboo and sacred.12 That which is _fady_ is mandated by the ancestors—be it mandated that you don’t do it, or that you do.