**CHILDHOODISATIMEOFEXPLORATION. ITISATIMETOLEARNRULES, TOBREAKRULES,** and to make new rules.

When our older son, Zack, was five years old, he innovated a new mode of locomotion down stairs, which involved a large rubber ball and a mattress. It worked well, until it didn’t. His arm break required the surgical insertion of metal pins to stabilize the growth plate of his humerus, and another surgery six weeks later to remove them, but he healed beautifully, and innovated with more wisdom going forward.

A young orangutan following his mother through the trees may whimper and call for her upon reaching a gap that is too large for him to cross. She will return and bridge the gap, allowing him both to cross and to see how it is done.1

Young ravens spend years in large social groups after they become independent from their parents, and before they form pair-bonds with long-term partners. Alliances form during this time, but conflicts also arise, and those ravens that figure out how to reconcile with one another experience less aggression going forward.2

When a young snow monkey named Imo’ innovated cleaning her sweet potatoes by dipping them into the sea, the adults in her troop were slow to take notice. They lived together on a tiny islet in Japan, but only two adults in the troop copied her behavior over the next five years. The young monkeys, though, the other children and subadults, watched and learned. Five years on, nearly 80 percent of the juvenile monkeys were cleaning their sweet potatoes in the style of Imo’.3

During childhood, we learn how to be. We also learn who we are, and we dream about who we might become.

Humans are not blank slates, but of all organisms on Earth, we are the blankest.4 We have the longest childhoods on Earth,5 and we arrive in the world with more plasticity than any other species—meaning that we are the least set in stone. Software, which is the interplay of experience and knowledge with capacity, is more important in humans than in any other species. A profound demonstration of this can be seen in the peopling of the Americas. A handful of ancestors came into the New World with Stone Age technology, and diversified into hundreds of cultures across two continents, inventing writing, astronomy, architecture, and city-states along

the way, the pace of change being far too rapid to be attributable to genes. It all took place on the software side.

Our ability to learn language is part of our hardware. Nearly all human babies have this competence latent in them. Which language a baby will speak, however, is entirely context dependent: that’s software. Furthermore, we quickly lose some of our ability to hear and construct the phonemes and tones of languages that are not in our environment, regardless of our particular ethnicity or lineage. Just as we are born with more neuronal potential than we use (most of our neurons die off before we become adults), we are also born with more linguistic potential than we use, and some of it is lost during childhood. We are born with broad potential, and that potential narrows over time.6

On its surface, the pairing down of initial capacity may seem like a tremendous waste. So why do we do it? The answer is that when we are born we are in a mode of exploration. We cannot predict ahead of time precisely what neurons we will need, or what language we will speak, so we are born with a surplus of capacity. This permits us to optimize our minds to whatever world we find ourselves born into, without the need for prior knowledge. We are born to explore the world around us, discover its secrets, and structure our minds accordingly. Once this job is done, we shed our surplus capacity, lest it become a metabolic liability, all cost and no reward.

Humans are social, with long life spans, and have overlap between generations: grandparents, parents, and children may all live in the same place at the same time. These characteristics also apply to the other apes, to the toothed whales (dolphins and orcas) and to elephants, to parrots and corvids (crows and jays), wolves and lions, and more.

All species that are social, are long-lived, and have generational overlap also tend to have long childhoods. These other species’ childhoods come with tantrums and play, emotional depth and cognitive capacity, just like ours. The adults that develop from those children of other species have social complexity that is recognizable to us humans as well: spinner dolphins choreograph elaborate group hunts;7 New Caledonian crows share information among their friends;8 elephants grieve.9

Spending time as children allows animals to learn about their environment. Therefore, stealing childhood from the young—by organizing and scheduling their play for them, by keeping them from risk and exploration, by controlling and sedating them with screens and algorithms and legal drugs—practically guarantees that they will arrive at the age of adulthood without being capable of actually being adults. All of these actions—almost always well intentioned—prevent the human software from refining our crude and rudimentary hardware.

Absent childhood, animals must rely more fully on hardware, and therefore be less flexible. Among migratory bird species, those that are born knowing how, when, and where to migrate—those that are migrating entirely with instructions they were born with—sometimes have wildly inefficient migration routes. These birds, born knowing how to migrate, don’t adapt easily. So when lakes dry up, forest becomes farmland, or climate change pushes breeding grounds farther north, those birds that are born knowing how to migrate keep flying by the old rules and maps. By comparison, birds with the longest childhoods, and those that migrate with their parents, tend

to have the most efficient migration routes.10 Childhood facilitates the passing on of cultural information, and culture can evolve faster than genes. Childhood gives us flexibility in a changing world.11

**Learning to Navigate Backflips and Traffic**

The human desire to do a backflip must be almost as old as bipedalism. The ability to record oneself learning to do backflips is rather more modern. One can find myriad YouTube videos that chronicle a young person’s attempts to stick the landing on a double backflip. It takes the inclination to try, and numerous attempts over many days, weeks, maybe months. It takes the willingness to risk injury, and perseverance in the aftermath of failure. There is no guarantee as to how long it will take, and no sure path to success. If you won’t accept all of these things, you are unlikely to end up being able to do backflips.

Sitting in a room listening to a talk about backflips is not going to result in you doing any backflips either, although you might learn how to answer questions about backflips. You might learn to _sound_ like an expert, while in possession of no actual expertise.

Children learn through observation and experience. While various cultures, including WEIRD ones, focus increasingly on direct instruction (which becomes formalized as school), cultures from the Navajo to the Inuit avoid teaching when at all possible.12

Children learn from their parents, from their siblings, from their extended family and friend groups. Siblings have historically been particularly corrective forces, as they tend to be brutally honest (and sometimes just brutal) when their brother or sister does something poorly, or has an error in judgment. The ways that children enforce their own views of appropriate behavior on other children may look mean to adults, but when children are actually allowed to roam freely, in groups, and engage in long periods of unstructured play, the bullies and jerks are more likely to lose power than gain it,13 and everyone learns how to both create and follow rules that work. Across cultures in which play has been observed, even very young children who are allowed to engage in open-ended play in potentially dangerous areas with no adult supervision tend to resolve disputes quickly among themselves, and rarely have accidents.14

Compare this to a modern recess at school: All play is supervised, children are often restricted from playing or creating games that limit who or how many people can play (because that would be “exclusionary”), and any disagreement between children is immediately arbitrated by an adult.15 Children growing up restricted to environments like this will not be capable adults.

In Quito, a bustling metropolis of fast-moving vehicles and inconsistent adherence to traffic laws, we watched a tiny child, maybe four years old, navigate a complex intersection entirely on his own. After crossing several lanes of traffic—completely safely, without having required any traffic to stop for him—he entered a small store, purchased a bag of fruit, crossed back through the same intersection, and disappeared into an apartment building where, presumably, a mother or aunt or other adult was waiting for him, having sent him off to procure food. At the time, our own children were eleven and nine, and we didn’t trust _them_ to navigate that intersection on their own. They had never been exposed to such a situation before—how could they already be savvy

to its risks? They were, however, already savvy about the Amazon rain forest, and we allowed them to explore the jungle in a way that the Quito child would not have been safe doing, as he had almost certainly never spent time in the Amazon.

It is a fine needle to thread, giving children enough space to make their own decisions and mistakes, and protecting them from real danger. Our societal pendulum has swung too far to one side—to protecting children against all risk and harm—such that many who come of age under this paradigm feel that everything is a threat, that they need safe spaces, that words are violence. By comparison, children with exposure to diverse experiences—physical, psychological, and intellectual—learn what is possible, and become more expansive. It is imperative that children experience discomfort in each of these realms: physical, psychological, and intellectual. Absent that, they end up full-grown but confused about what harm actually is. They end up children in the bodies of adults.

Children are perfectly designed to acquire, and to want to acquire, the skill set that they will need as adults. We moderns have disrupted this to a remarkable degree. Children will self-program, if we let them. Similarly, adults will provide a road map to the environment in which their children are growing up, unless market forces intervene (a point to which we will return at the end of the book). Buying snake oil, in the form of authoritative parenting books (well intentioned though they may be), is now considered a badge of good parenting, but it should not be (we say that knowing that we are, in part, presenting as authorities offering parenting advice). Meanwhile, trusting yourself to do right by your child, and to let your children explore and take risks, gets the side-eye.16 This is backwards land.

**Plasticity**

Childhood—and by extension parenting—is an interplay of love and release, of holding someone close while also giving them freedom to explore, even perhaps to leave. In biology, we speak of _plasticity_, often _phenotypic plasticity_, to refer to the many outcomes that are possible from the same starting materials. Roughly speaking, a genotype (say, the alleles for brown eyes) produces a phenotype (the actual brown eyes). Phenotype is the observable form of an organism. For many traits, though, a particular genotype encodes information for a _range_ of possible phenotypes,17 and interactions with the molecular, cellular, gestational, and external environment determine what phenotype will actually be produced.

Phenotypic plasticity allows individuals to respond in real time to changing environments, to avoid being canalized into set patterns and lifeways by their genes.

The skulls of dominant wild hyenas are big and robust, with large sagittal crests on top and broad zygomatic arches at their cheeks. Both of these structures provide places for muscles to attach—much needed if you’re in the business of asserting your dominance with your teeth. Compare this to the skulls of hyenas born and raised in captivity, which have no such structures.18 The different environments of wild versus captive hyenas affect what form (morph) they have.

In the same vein, human children who chew soft, processed foods have smaller faces as adults than those who grow up chewing hard, tough food.19

Spadefoot tadpoles can grow slowly into omnivorous morphs, or if they are tightly packed and running out of time and space in the ephemeral pools in which they live, they can grow more quickly into larger, fiercer cannibal morphs, and feed on each other. Which morph a spadefoot tadpole develops into is entirely context dependent.20

When temperatures soar, zebra finches communicate this to their unhatched chicks. Zebra finch chicks, whose parents “told” them about high temperatures while they were still in their eggs, alter their begging behavior as nestlings, and when they become adults, they prefer hotter nest sites.21

Even our critically important aortic arch, the first arterial branch off the heart that takes oxygenated blood to the body, has several common anatomies within human populations, which can develop from highly similar genetic starting gates.22

Plasticity provides the possibility of alternate phenotypes, often through simple rules that do not prescribe precise outcomes. The result, ever more so with increasing levels of complexity, is exploration of new territory, literal and metaphorical.23

One place that plasticity manifests in humans is the wide variety of approaches to parenting across cultures. In Tajikistan, babies and toddlers are restrained for hours on end in cradles known as gahvoras. Gahvoras are treasured within families, and passed down between generations. Tajik children are the center of family life; mothers, grandmothers, aunts, and neighbors are always available, and immediately respond to cries from a cradled baby with food, singing, or other comfort. Counter to Western expectations, though, within a few weeks of babies being born, they are placed in gahvoras, provided funnels and holes through which to pee and poop, and their legs and torsos are tightly bound.24 Children thus cradled can move their heads, but little else. These children, with little experience crawling or attempting to walk in their infancy, do not walk as early as children raised in the West. The World Health Organization’s formal expectations for when children start to walk are between eight and eighteen months,25 and yet Tajik children may not walk until two or three years of age.26 Are the Tajik babies dullards, or physically incompetent? No.

In contrast, children in a rural Kenyan village sit and walk earlier than Western babies tend to.27 Are the Kenyan babies inherently destined for greatness, their precocious motor skills predictive of early mastery across domains? Also no.

Variations in baby-raising culture across humans exemplify some of the great plasticity that humans have. Kenyan babies walk earlier than Western babies—but all but the most severely disabled Western babies learn to walk, soon enough.

WEIRD parents are not just focused on our children, we are focused on the metrics that are easily recorded and conveyed to others: the _when_ of our child’s first smile, word, or step. Once we have such metrics in hand, we are easily confused into imagining that the _when_ is a critical measure not just of health, but of future capacity. Once again, the easily measured thing—the calorie, the size, the date—becomes an inaccurate stand-in for a larger analysis of the health of the system. By believing in the false notion that _when_ a benchmark is met is the salient measure

of health and progress, we play into our modern fear of risk. It is _risky_ for my child to miss a benchmark. It is _risky_ for me not to force my child to meet arbitrary deadlines. Such parental focus can instill fear in our children, which they carry forward as an aversion to risk.

**Fragility and Antifragility**

Humans are antifragile:28 We grow stronger with exposure to manageable risks, with the pushing of boundaries. As we grow into adults, exposure to discomfort and uncertainty—physical, emotional, and intellectual—is necessary if we are to become our best selves.

Just after fertilization, the zygote is incredibly fragile. A large percentage of pregnancies end in early miscarriage29—and in many of these cases, it happens so early that the woman never even knows she was pregnant. With every passing day, the zygote becomes more robust, more resilient, and more capable—but even at birth, the baby isn’t exactly ready to rock and roll. We are born unformed, in need of active, nearly constant parental care for a long time.

From extremely fragile zygote, to fairly fragile baby, to ever less fragile child and young adult, the goal for the individual, and their parents, is that they become antifragile, not merely unfragile. In part, this takes recognizing that development is a continuum. Just as mothers-to-be are advised not to feed their fetuses alcohol by drinking when pregnant, we don’t give alcohol to babies or toddlers. The line grows fuzzier and fuzzier over time, though, and at some point it becomes OK for a young person to drink alcohol, because the anatomical and physiological systems are developed enough to deal with the insults and injuries that drinking brings. Similarly, we don’t expose our children to physical or emotional risk in utero if we can help it. Birth seems like this bright line, a clear and unambiguous border—and it is in some regards—but the less of a bright line we can make it for the baby, the stronger and more antifragile that baby will grow up to be.

“Expose children to risk and challenge” is therefore a rule, like so many rules in complex systems, that is context dependent. So while exposing your child to ever greater risk as they grow up is integral to their becoming antifragile, you cannot do so by simply throwing them in the deep end. First, you must make sure that your child knows, at the deepest level, that they are loved, that you have their back, and that no matter what, if they are in trouble, you will do everything possible to come in and get them.

Bond tightly with your children early on. As we have shown, different cultures do it differently. We are fans of attachment parenting: carrying your child as you move through the world, so that they see what you see, and are in literal contact with you; and co-sleeping with your baby (which, contrary to some reports, makes having an infant easier on parents, not harder). When your baby cries, go to him, assure him that he is not alone. A child thus treated is likely to have the confidence, pretty early, to go out adventuring, because they know that someone—their parents—have their back, no matter what.30

So when some parents try to make their babies resilient by putting them alone in dark rooms and expecting them to learn to comfort themselves, those parents are not understanding what sort of being they have on their hands. There is nothing in our millions of years of evolutionary

history that should lead an infant to feel secure alone in a room. The screaming that results may actually not just be maddening to parents, but may also be a way for a baby to assess whether or not she’s safe from danger. If she’s safe (and helpless infants, unlike college students, _do_ need safe spaces), she can go about her business learning how to be a human. It may not look like she’s learning much, but she is, and the neural circuits that she’s laying down now will almost certainly look different if they emerge from a position of: “I’m confident and secure because I am taken care of,” as opposed to “I don’t know what’s what.” The latter is likely to produce fear and anxiety.

The fact that the child has no idea what she is doing, or why, does not make it any less real, or any less evolutionary. The calculus involved in the building of a snail’s shell is real, but no sane person concludes that snails are consciously doing calculus.

The younger the child, the more secure and safe she needs to know that she is, which creates the inner strength and resilience to go out and explore sooner, and with greater skill and courage. Just because a parent knows that he adores his child, and would let harm come to himself in order to protect her, does not mean that this is known by the child. Tiny larval forms can’t know that yet. The only inputs a baby can take in are: When I communicate my needs, are they met? Do I have evidence that my parents are present when I call for them?

Of course, children will quickly learn to test the system, and to try to game their parents. Parents and children are together for the long haul, and children are selected to figure out parental moves, and to attempt to manipulate them. Indeed, manipulation begins before birth.31 A fetus is selected to extract resources from its mother, even as the mother is selected to provide for her child, while also keeping some in reserve, both for her own health and for that of future children.32

Static rules don’t work with children. Rules have to be nimble, able to change as the child matures, and responsive to both the needs and the tactics of the child. That being said, as early as possible—and really, far earlier than there is any expectation that the child can understand what you are saying—talk to your children as if they are mature and responsible beings. Hold them responsible for their actions, and for ever more of their needs as they grow up. Give them real work to do, not busywork. Do not make false threats (“If you keep doing that, I’ll turn this car around!”). Always make sure that they know they are loved.

With full understanding that luck and timing are beyond a family’s control, and that even the best-laid plans and parenting are no guarantee of success, allow us to tell you how this has looked for us. With our own children, we have expected them to make their own breakfasts and lunches on school days since they were in elementary school, as well as to feed the pets daily and do their own laundry every week. We also, gradually, exposed them to a wide range of risks. By the time they were ten years old, they were trustworthy on top of mesas in Eastern Washington, with coral snakes in the Amazon, in forests and surf at various locations (but less competent in cities). When they did get hurt in minor ways, we didn’t put bandages on “boo-boos”; instead, we told them to get up when they fell and get back on the bike or scooter or up the tree.

But when they were tiny, one of us was usually touching the child—wearing him, carrying him, sleeping with him. Now they are adventurous and polite, with senses of humor and justice.

They know to honor good rules and question bad ones. We have told them that sometimes we’ll make mistakes and give them bad rules, but we are 100 percent on their team, and they should ask why our rules are what they are, but it is counterproductive to simply break them for the sake of breaking them. For the most part, they don’t.

One set of rules that many WEIRD parents have, but that are frequently broken by children, surrounds bedtime. How do you increase the chances that you will end up with children who literally never come out of their bedrooms after bedtime, as we did—thus securing hours, weeks, months of time for the other adult(s) in your life? For the first year-ish of their lives, our boys slept with us or next to us, and when they cried, we responded quickly. Sometimes it felt endless, to be sure, but in short order, they didn’t cry much. Once they were sleeping in their own room, we had family nighttime rituals, like reading to them, but we also made it clear that bedtime was bedtime and that they should not game us. When it was time for bed, we tucked them in, and neither of them ever did come out of their room with nighttime demands. We believe that this is in part because they knew that we were there, and that if they really needed us, we would come.

**Play and Tinkering and Sport**

Humans are both competitive and collaborative. We cannot be human without both of these things, and unstructured play reveals both in children.

Play, it has been proposed, serves to enable mammalian children to develop kinematic and emotional flexibility for use in unexpected, and uncontrollable, situations.33 In young golden lion tamarins—small Brazilian monkeys with orange manes—play can be wild and raucous. It costs metabolic energy, and forces adults to be vigilant on their behalf, as the risk of predation from hawks, big cats, and snakes is real for these diminutive monkeys.34 Despite these costs and risks, complex play persists, and so—hearkening back to the three-part test of adaptation introduced in chapter 3—play must be adaptive.

Play can look so many ways. Broadly speaking, play can explore the physical world, the social one, or some combination of the two. There is terrific value in tinkering, in taking physical objects and moving them through their paces, in taking them apart and seeing if they go back together again. We are both old enough to remember hobby shops and RadioShack being places that facilitated such investigation; the decline and demise, respectively, of such spaces, in combination with widespread replacement of mechanical parts with electronic ones (in everything from cars to toasters), means that this kind of play is more difficult to come by in the 21st century. It is well worth seeking, however. This investigation of mechanical space is no less exploratory than a hike off-trail through physical space. Many girls are more likely to want to explore explicitly social space—staging tea parties, in which they act out the words and intentions of their guests, which may be dolls and stuffed animals, in advance of having real guests with whom they can interact—and that, too, is exploratory.

Formal sport often brings both together, especially team sports. Team sports can bring the physical and social together in a fun and creative way, and are a valuable platform for exploration. They are not for everyone, but sports are one way to ensure physical skill, and

physical skill facilitates mental clarity and strength. That said, team sports are not a complete replacement for either unstructured play or physical engagement with the world that most would call “work.” Work must be done, and children are well served by doing some of it. For instance, given that fences exist, they are built by someone, and it is too easy for those who have never built one to imagine that doing so is simple, or banal. In families of white-collar workers, if children engage in physical activity only when parents ferry them to specially sanctioned places and times for formal sport, the illusion is created that real physical work is always an option, never a necessity. While that may serve your class aspirations (and it may currently reflect the reality of your life), it does not serve your child. Sport is valuable, _and_ it should not fully replace physical work.

So formal sport is valuable, and physical work is, too, but deeper yet is simple play, with no top-down enforcement of rules. When children play a pickup game in their neighborhood, making up the rules as they go, or modifying rules for established games for whatever court and gear they have at hand, they are learning deep truths from play. Those children learn even more if they are of many ages and skills. Younger children gain access to activities they could not do alone, are able to observe activities they are not ready for, and receive mentorship and emotional care beyond that which their peers could offer. Similarly, older children in mixed-age groups gain practice in nurturing, leading, and mentorship, and often get inspiration for creative activities.35

Remember Chesterton’s fence—that irritating object that you should not remove until you know its purpose—and consider Chesterton’s play, in all of its messy diversity. Eradicate it at your—and your child’s—peril.

**On the Dangers of Apparently Animate Objects That Can’t Respond**

Do not let inanimate objects babysit your children. Leave a child alone with displays that look and sound alive—be they human actors or animations—but are not alive, and so do not respond to living beings, and the child learns all of the wrong lessons. Why is there an uptick in diagnoses on the autism spectrum now?36 We posit that it is, in part, related to the number of children who were raised staring into screens animated with creatures that seemed to be alive but weren’t. Those seemingly alive creatures, which cannot and therefore will not respond to a child’s looks or gestures or questions, send the message to the developing brain that the world is not an emotionally responsive place. What is a child to make of this world? How is a child to develop a nuanced theory of mind—the ability to attribute mental states to others, and to understand that others can and do have desires and opinions that are different from one’s own?

Our ability to recognize that other individuals are both different from self and yet equally deserving of respect and fair treatment is not unique to humans. Baboons, for instance, show a deep theory of mind. A female baboon can accurately assess whether threatening vocalizations from another female are directed at her, based on what social interactions the two individuals have recently had. A baboon understands that, when another individual is looking at food, they

are likely to defend that food should it be threatened. Yet baboons also fail at tasks that would seem obvious to humans—mothers routinely carry their babies on their stomachs, and when moms make water crossings between islands, they continue to do so, which sometimes drowns their submerged infants.37

Humans engage in theory of mind more often and more deeply than any other species. We interact with inanimate and animate objects differently, and learn not to ascribe intent to those that do not react. Letting inanimate objects babysit your young child risks sending the child the message that others in the world are neither responsive to nor deserving of respect and fairness.

**Legal Drugs and Children**

In combination with restricted access to risk and play (helicopter parenting), and using screens as babysitters, the diversity of legal drugs that are now regularly given to children helps create a perfect storm of societal factors that are damaging our children.

The considerable rise in mood-altering and behavior-modifying pharmaceuticals being given to children in the last several decades38 is, we posit, in part a response to children resisting school culture, which we will explore further in the next chapter. Boys are more likely to get diagnosed with ADHD and prescribed speed, which “allows” them to focus, and increases the chances that they will tolerate sitting still, facing forward, in neat rows. Because rough-and-tumble play no longer suits our delicate sensibilities as a culture, we prefer to drug our children into submission. Girls, on the other hand, with less proclivity toward “acting out” and greater proclivity toward being agreeable and anxious, are more likely to get prescribed antianxiety meds and antidepressants. Most school seems better suited to girl ways of being and learning than to boy ways of being and learning,39 but that doesn’t mean it’s healthy for girls, either.

The conditions that boys tend to be diagnosed with are often classified as learning disabilities or, more recently, the less fraught term _neurodiversity_. We posit two things about neurodiversity.

First, except for rare, extreme examples, many people who exhibit “neurodiversity” benefit from trade-offs that allow them enhanced insight or skills in other areas. There is also value simply in being the “rare phenotype,” in looking at the world differently from how the majority sees it. This logic applies not just to people who have autism spectrum disorder, especially if they are high functioning, but also to people who have ADHD or are dyslexic, dysgraphic, color-blind, left-handed, or more.40 Given a choice, you might not choose any of these traits for yourself or your children, but that preference may say more about our inability to understand trade-offs—especially cryptic intellectual trade-offs—than it does about what is actually benefic