In other animals, when social, species-level generalists have wide geographic range, individuals will often become problem-solving specialists that share their insights with conspecifics. This is true in humans, and in all the usual suspects: wolves and dolphins, crows and baboons, and so on. These animals can be understood to have a form of consciousness.

Tree frogs, octopuses, and salmon do not, however, have consciousness. These three clades vary widely in life history and intelligence—octopuses are famously smart, and excellent at solving puzzles; tree frogs and salmon, while fascinating, are not capable of the kinds of cognitive feats that octopuses are. What all of these clades have in common is that individuals are not social.

A large congregation of western chorus frogs on a Michigan pond on an early spring night, loud though it may be, is not a social group. The frogs come together to mate, but once the deed is done, they separate from one another and never interact again. Chorus frog parents never even meet their offspring. Similarly, salmon swim upstream en masse, and spend time near one another competing for the best nest sites—but aggregation is not the same as sociality.

It’s the difference between the people on your subway car (with whom you aggregate), and the people with whom you share a house (with whom you are, under most circumstances, social). Even this is a flawed example though as, being humans, we do notice and remember certain people on the train, especially if we see them every day, or if they strike us as intriguing, even if we never exchange words. Aggregating is just coming together in space. Subways are functionally human aggregators, but they also bring us into social contact, in part because humans are always on the lookout for social opportunities. A train full of tree frogs would not become social, no matter how often they commuted together.

By comparison, a large congregation of baboons on the Okavango Delta has lasting power—there are multiple hierarchies that predict who will get to eat first and whose baby will thrive, and the baboons keep track not just of individuals, but of the relationships between them.2 Their culture is evolving, just as ours is.

Sociality involves recognition of individuals, the tracking of social fate, and iterated inteancractions that are, at least plausibly, continuing into the future.