Trade-offs Chesterton’s fence reminds us that things that have been built by humans, or have been selected for over many generations, are likely to have hidden benefits. At the point when early 20th century doctors were declaring the appendix and large intestine to be not only useless, but actually hazardous, people aware of Darwin, or of trade-offs (or both), should have been able to put on the brakes. Whatever the problem with the large intestine was perceived to be, it would have been smart to try to figure out what benefit it brought before yanking it out and tossing it away. In everything there are trade-offs. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of distinct competing concerns in any given organism, so how can you possibly know where to begin to look for the trade-off relationships? In fact, pick any two traits, and they are in a trade-off relationship. Trade-offs exist, like the peaks on an adaptive landscape, whether they have been discovered or not.19 Broadly speaking, there are two types of trade-offs.20 Allocation trade-offs are the most obvious, well studied, and famous. They are the ones that people assume you’re talking about if you just say “trade-off.” Because many things in biology are zero-sum (meaning that there is a finite amount of resources to pull from—the pie has a size that does not change), we can easily intuit that, if you’re a deer, in order to make a larger set of antlers, something else has to give. You’ve got to borrow from elsewhere in order to get bigger antlers—perhaps you lose some bone density, or spend down other reserves. Under some conditions, perhaps you could just start eating more, and grow more antlers, but this raises the question: If it were that simple, and eating more benefited you in this easy way, what prevented you from doing it before? Assuming that something is constraining your diet such that it cannot simply be increased, growing bigger antlers means having less of something else. The second type of trade-off is design constraint. Unlike allocation trade-offs, design constraint trade-offs are insensitive to supplementation—you cannot just add more of something to solve the problem. For instance, robustness (broadly: being big-boned and muscular) is valuable, as is locomotor efficiency, but you can’t maximize both—again, something has to give, and the problem cannot be solved with more resources. Similarly, if you’re a bird (or a bat, or an airplane), you can fly with speed, or agility, but you will be only middlingly fast and maneuverable if you try to maximize both. Some other bird will be faster, a third one more agile —but you, you can be a generalist, which is its own kind of success. The speed versus agility trade-off is easily seen in the body shape of fish.21 The deep body form of, for instance, angelfish allows them to hover in place and to turn at tight angles while moving almost not at all. This is useful if one of your main jobs in life is nibbling stuff off coral. Compare the shape of an angelfish to that of a sardine, however: long and thin, the sardine is best at speed over straightaways. It can probably pull a good zig in advance of a predator’s zag, but it can’t stand still.22 So design constraint trade-offs reveal that you can’t be both fastest and most maneuverable. Design constraint trade-offs also reveal that you can’t be both the most robust and the most efficient. Less intuitively, you also can’t be fastest and bluest.23 Humans do a great job of evading some trade-offs, of course. For instance, we have addressed the fast-versus-impenetrable trade-off by building outside of ourselves—by having extended phenotypes.24 The domestication of horses, and advent of castles, allowed some humans to be both fast and impenetrable. And as we discussed in chapter 1, we seem to have beaten the odds when it comes to the trade-off between specialists and generalists. Humans are a broadly generalist species, with the capacity for individuals—and cultures— to go deep and specialize in myriad contexts and skill sets. Harsh environments tend to require cultural specialization. In less harsh environments, cultures and their populations can thrive by being farsighted as a whole, while encouraging specialization within individuals.