**1:22:00.8 JB:** In summary, then, even when describing the triumph of modernity, Girard’s theory captures both our highs and our lows – what is so unique, exciting, praiseworthy, but also what is so perverse, hypocritical and distasteful and why the two are intimately conjoined. It is the forcefulness of love that makes our hypocrisy so unpalatable. It is the importance of truth that makes our dogmas all the more frustrating and it is the heights of innovation that makes our fashions all the more laughable. Think back to the rocket analogy. If love, truth and innovation is the divine trajectory which Christianity has laid out for us, then hypocrisy, dogma, and fashion are consequences of the gravitational pull from corrupt human nature.

But make no mistake. Overall, Girard is a champion of all these positive forces we mentioned today – from the birth of science all the way to the expansion of global aid. Just as a good parent does not hold back on necessary criticism and Tocqueville – a self-identified ally of democracy – certainly did not mince words on democratic shortcomings. Girard’s criticisms are so severe because he desperately wants modernity to succeed. Modernity – then, for Girard – is a legitimate triumph of man, despite the hypocrisies. We can embrace it wholeheartedly, even if we can’t embrace the whole of it.

Girard’s achievement, I would argue, is his ability to make sense of, legitimize, speak with, and give advice across the entire political spectrum, from the progressives who affirms the direction of history to the reactionaries who want to bring back classical ideals and just about everyone in between. To the progressives, Girard legitimates their championing of the key forces within modernity: the concern for victims, justice for all, science and the seeking of truth, innovation and all the technological advancements that have brought us here. However, Girard warns them to not fall prey to hypocrisy, to dogma, to fashion. For not only would they be committing the very mistakes they claim to avoid, they would be delegitimizing these positive forces within modernity and engendering the opposite. To the reactionaries, Girard sees them as primarily reacting against progressive hypocrisy. He is able to understand their distaste of modernity – after all, what is more disgusting in the championing of evil is championing evil under the banner of good. Girard warns reactionaries, however, to separate their dislike of hypocrites from the fundamentally good values that the hypocrites promote. Love, truth, innovation are praiseworthy, even if many who champion them today are not.

Even the triumph of modernity is tainted with perversion, as our stubborn human nature rebels against the path Christianity has set for us. The careful listener will observe violence lurking in the shadows behind all three of these forces. The hypocrisy of love engenders and legitimates violence. Truth tears down the rituals that make for easy resolution and the prohibitions that have kept violence in check. And innovation arms violence with increasingly powerful means. Violence is the fourth and final force and it will step out of the shadows and be the central topic of our next and final lecture. Alas, this triumph of modernity will show itself to be fragile and ephemeral indeed. The conclusion to Girard’s theory will also be the conclusion to the story of mankind.