**00:55:36.0 JB:** The next point that Girard is going to make is that capitalism also channels, is an outlet for violence that acts as a stabilizing force. Before I go on and elaborate on this last and third point, let me be clear that when Girard says that capitalism is a channel for violence, he doesn’t have in mind whipping slaves to build the pyramids, but that the same energies of violence, of pride, of desire for conquest, are the dominant ones driving capitalism today. Girard reminds us, I quote: “It is not by chance that the European aristocracy went into business once heroes and warriors went out of style.”

Girard’s reading of capitalism here is nothing new – private vice leads to public virtue. When we peek behind the motivational curtains of actors in capitalism, we shouldn’t expect to find a desire to help others. Hell, we shouldn’t even expect to find materialistic, selfish greed. Instead, Girard thinks that it’s the exact same motivational force as the tribal chief’s giving away goods – it’s honor, it’s prestige, it’s glory, it’s conquest. The princes and heroes of yore who would have amassed armies now find themselves competing to make products and services. Girard warns us, don’t be fooled by what the actors in capitalism tell you, it’s the same drive that drove Achilles to kill Hector, Germany to invade France, and Caesar to capture Vercingetorix that underpins our world economy today.

**0:57:09.7 DP:** Hearing you talk about the armies and products makes me think of how many entrepreneurs, a shocking number of entrepreneurs I know, were criminals in high school. I’ve been trying to back into what’s going on there because they clearly have this either violent or destructive or rebellious energy inside of them. But it’s through capitalism that they channel their pursuits into the pursuit of profit, which is better for society than the illicit activities that they used to engage in.

**0:57:39.8 JB:** I think this is both a critique of capitalism, that it’s fundamentally still driven off these same-spirited forces and by these malicious actors, but also a deep, deep praise of capitalism for the point you just made, that it channels these malicious energies to such a productive use. This is what Girard has to say: “The United States never relapsed into totalitarian contractions because of – among other reasons – its social fluidity, its extensive mobility both in geographical and in social terms. The modern Western economy is the first civilization that has learned to use mimetic rivalry positively. It is known as economic competition.” Girard’s point is that what a miracle it is that people today who seek revenge, who seek glory, who seek to conquer, who seek to channel their conquering drives, who would have had to raise armies and engage in zero-sum wars just a few hundred years ago, today they primarily satisfy these malicious drives by creating better products and services for others.

Think about how ambivalent this makes Girard. Just as we discussed in the last lecture, the good forces of Christianity – truth, love, and innovation – power, the most terrible currents of modernity, the most terrifying and apocalyptic force – violence – is responsible for fueling the best living standards of any human society ever to exist.