- J Christ: no tit for tat Morality
    
    Christ then, for Girard, completes the Hebrew Bible in both its form and its content. This completion is captured in no better place than Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount, where he articulates the core moral framework of Christianity. I read to you Matthew 5:38-40: “**Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also”**  
    ◦
    

- Jews: tit for tat Morality
    
    Jesus here is taking the Jewish intuition to its completion. An eye for an eye is from Leviticus, and this type of tit-for-tat morality is common to Jewish law. The Jewish law only asks us to refrain from violent initiative, but in some sense encourages violent responses. Jesus’ point is that it’s not enough to simply refrain from violent initiative, because in mimetic rivalries we always feel we are wronged, we are always acting on the defensive. Perhaps thinking about the example of nuclear war is helpful here.  
    ◦
    

- Jews: you nuke I nuke, Crist they nuke you take it
    
    Some states around the topic of nuclear war have declared that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons. But I think that’s a very little comfort to anyone, because it’s so easy to misinterpret an innocuous action for an attack and thus initiate a nuclear war when you think you’re actually defending yourself. The only way to be rid of the scapegoat mechanism is for everyone to unilaterally renounce violence, even in the case where violence is committed unto us. While the content of the Hebrew Bible delegitimizes and sometimes exposes violence, it still permits for the controlled use of it. Jesus is going to take that to the extreme. We must say no to violence, full stop, period.  
    ◦
    

- Monopoly on violence
    
    But to fully give up violence, we must also move away from legalism. I read to you Matthew 5:21-22: “Ye have heard that it was said of them of old time, thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, worthless, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.”  
    ◦
    

- Legality they new prohibition
    
    Jesus also completes the form of Judaism. He goes beyond mere legal prescriptions – his morality is one that governs the internal soul and not just the actions of the external body. Not only is killing, as it’s prescribed in the Hebrew Bible, a sin – so is mere anger, violent thought, and intention. Legal rules, pagan prohibitions, cannot save us from the scapegoat mechanism from reciprocal violence because of Girard’s views on theodicy. Human nature is so essentially corrupt that it can poison the system we set around it and use it to persecute and scapegoat, even if it was intended to stop persecution. This was the story of Cain – what was a prohibition set by God against violence – that Cain shall be avenged sevenfold became a war cry, the logic of a blood feud for Cain’s grandson – declaring himself that he shall be avenged seventy-sevenfold.  
    ◦
    

- Jesus then will end legalism
    
    I see this all the time where legalism fails, where the laws don’t do what we want them to do. And if you go back a couple years ago and you would drive around America, you would see these big yellow billboards that said Amazon, $15 minimum wage. And there are all these people throwing their fists up, chanting: go Amazon! Go Amazon! And those people often wanted to support small businesses. That was the thing that they were interested in. They wanted to support labor. But what happened was that $15 minimum wage actually made it impossible for small businesses to compete against Amazon. Why? Because Amazon has a ton of cash. These small businesses don’t. And so the laws end up having their opposite effect.**0:25:43.5 JB:** Yeah, I think that’s a great example. And I’m probably trying to stretch the analogy here. But it’s something like in the same way that God prescribed on Cain that his killing would be avenged sevenfold, and that was to protect them from violence, social movements try to create minimum wage for labor and small business. But just as Cain’s grandson co-opted the law from God and turned it to the logic of a blood feud, in your example, it seems that Amazon co-opted the labor law and turned it away to go against labor as well as small business. Is that right? Did I understand that correctly?**0:26:16.3 DP:** Yeah.**0:26:17.1 JB:** And that is precisely the problem with legalism. No matter what legal institutions and rules you put in place, no matter how well intentioned you are or even how good the effects initially. Human nature has a way of corrupting them and co-opting it for perverse means.  
    Jesus then will end legalism. Jesus is to the Hebrew Bible, what the spirit is to the letter. Jesus’ completion of the Hebrew intuition – that the victim is innocent – will reach its zenith in the crucifixion, our second topic of discussion that we must now turn to.  
    • The Crucifixion: the founding murder that ends all founding murders, the myth that ends all myths, the religious event to end all religions.  
    Christ’s crucifixion will be the founding murder that ends all founding murders, the myth that ends all myths, the religious event to end all religions.  
    ◦
    

- that the victim is innocent
    
    For Girard, _**the crucifixion exposes the scapegoat mechanism –**_ the basis for corrupt human society and false pagan religions – fatally wounding it once and for all. By doing so, Christ will show himself to be the one true God, standing above a sea of false pretenders. The crucifixion is also the completion of the Hebrew Bible, where the muffled intuition, buried deep within its stories – that the victim is innocent – will transform into a loud, unmistakable declaration. Jesus is the ultimate victim. He’s the perfect Abel. He’s the perfect Joseph. And the strategy to expose the scapegoat mechanism is quite similar, through proximity to pagan myth – the metaphor of the vaccine that we just discussed. So let us first reflect on how the crucifixion is very similar to the shape of pagan religion.  
    First, we have the mimetic contagion within the people of Jerusalem. The very crowd that has welcomed Jesus with open arms just days before, now has fully turned on Jesus. This radical switching of allegiances is emblematic of a group in contagion. Think back to Ajax, how quickly his anger was redirected from the Trojans to Odysseus. And think to the French Revolution and its revolving door of new victims. Violence is blind, and it just wants to sink its teeth into something.  
    Second, we have the scapegoating event, the founding murder, the actual judgment, sentencing and crucifixion of Christ. And there cannot be a better example of violent unanimity. Everyone stands against Christ. The Jewish religious authorities, the Roman political authorities, the two thieves crucified at either side of Jesus who all hurl insults at him, and all the disciples too betray Jesus, including Peter, upon which rock the Catholic Church will be built. All of them betray Jesus when being confronted by the crowd. Peter denies that he has anything to do with Jesus thrice.  
    Third then, we have an unlikely peace that is established and brokered between two previous enemies united by their dislike and expulsion of Christ: there’s Pontius Pilate, a Roman political authority; and Herod, a Jewish ruler.  
    Lastly, we have the divinization of Christ in his resurrection. Following from that, we have the institutionalization of this founding murder in the Bible, the Catholic Church, and all the multitude of religious rituals and prohibitions that flow from them – many of which are still with us today.  
    The structure of Christ’s crucifixion perfectly conforms to the pure form of the scapegoat mechanism. And if this were the extent of the Christ story, then it would be but another false pagan myth like Oedipus, Baldr, or Zeus. But of course – just like the stories of Abel and Joseph – within the details we find a story that is radically different from classical mythology, and one that seeks to subvert pagan religion from within.  
    For Girard, there are three qualities about Christ that both perfectly expose the scapegoat mechanism and show that he is the one true God: His innocence, his truth, his love. Let’s go through each of those qualities of Christ.  
    •
    

- Christ’s Innocence
    
      
    

- virgin birth
    
    Christ’s innocence begins before even Christ begins – with his virgin birth. Immediately, we are dealing with a being drastically different from the pagan gods, whose birth has always been depicted as rape or rape-like. Think back to the intercourse that made Dionysus, for example, Zeus bears down on Dionysus’ would-be mother like a beast of prey. That’s how it’s described. Christ’s birth is not bloody, it’s not a rape, hell there wasn’t even any sex in it – it was perfectly clean and an innocent beginning.  
    ◦
    

- The mob is guilty
    
    But Christ’s innocence is no better displayed than in a single line muttered by his prosecutor, Pontius Pilate, who judged and eventually sentenced Christ. Let me read you Luke 23:4: “**Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people, I find no fault in this man.”** Of course, Pilate here is talking about Jesus. Pilate had just interrogated Jesus by himself before he got caught up in the crowd. And his conclusion is unmistakable, that Jesus is innocent. Even Pilate’s wife knew Jesus was innocent and pleaded for his release. What this shows is that it was only forced by the hand of the mob did Pilate hesitantly sentence and crucify Jesus.  
    There’s no room for confusion or doubt here on the guilt of Jesus. Jesus is not guilty because what could be a better proof of the victim’s innocence than that his judge believed he was innocent? The mob is guilty, the expulsion was unjust, the victim is innocent. This is the fundamental, resounding message that comes from the crucifixion.  
    And it is a message that will expose and begin to tear down the scapegoat mechanism. From this moment on, we will be reading myths in light of the Gospels, which allows us to see their lies. The idea goes something like this: Christ’s innocence and unjust prosecution through the proliferation of Christianity becomes the dominant moral paradigm we view the world through. We will always be looking out for persecution. We will always be siding with the victim. We will always be aware of the deceitfulness of the mob in so far as we are in this Christian moral paradigm.  
    And this lens allows us to slowly but surely decode and escape from the scapegoat mechanism, which cannot function if people know that the victim is innocent. **Because if the victim is innocent, then catharsis cannot be achieved. Without catharsis, there’s no peace. Without peace, there’s no sacredity. Without sacredity, pagan worldly religions lose their prestige. And without prestige, they can no longer properly function. Christ is tearing down the pillars of deceitful worldly foundation.**  
    If not a proof on its own, Christ’s innocence, for Girard, is a strong reason to believe that he is the one true God because of his perfection. He withstands temptations. He never wrongs anyone. And unlike Old Testament victims who may have minor flaws – like Joseph’s hubris, for example – **Christ is perfectly innocent.**  
    But it’s not just the perfection of his innocence, but a perfection of that innocence in the least hospitable environment, which Girard thinks is so notable. I mean, recall, how he said that in mimetic contagion, when society is in frenzy, that frenzy tends to get to everyone? Well, the fact that Christ was able to maintain his innocence gives us a hint that he’s not subject to the same human follies.  
    •
    

- Christ’s Truth
    
    **0:33:51.0 JB:** What makes Jesus’ defeat of the scapegoat mechanism all the more total was that the reason Jesus was victimized was because he was trying to expose victimization. And so the very act of his murder became a proof of what he was trying to expose. Let me try to frame this in other words. Jesus had access to truth, the second quality – Girard believes that Jesus was the first being to understand the scapegoat mechanism and its effects on society.  
    Girard interprets many of Jesus’ parables as hinting at the scapegoat mechanism and the role of violence and murder in the foundation of worldly culture and society. But none is as convincing as what Girard calls, and some Christians call, the curse against the Pharisees. The context for the passage I’m gonna read you is this. Jesus here is talking to and reproaching the Pharisees – the Jewish legal authorities – for persecution. This is who Jesus is trying to defend, Luke 11:50-51: **“The blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world… From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zachariah which perished between the altar and the temple.”**  
    Jesus is trying to defend all victims of persecution here. Abel to Zechariah is supposed to represent all the victims, with Abel being the first victim and Zechariah being the last from the Hebrew Bible. What Jesus is trying to do is to expose the innocence of the victims. But this middle sentence is even more interesting “blood shed from the foundation of the world.” This foundation is not Genesis, it’s not the creation of the world. The Greek word that is translated to “foundation” here connotes a passing over from disorder to order. And what is that if not the peaceful effects of the scapegoat mechanism grounded on the blood of victims? The foundation mentioned is the foundation of worldly order from the scapegoat mechanism. That is what Christ is targeting here.**In this exchange, and exchanges like this, Christ wants to expose the role of innocent victims in the foundation of worldly power, including the power of the Pharisees. So, of course, the Pharisees cannot let him continue and will eventually be one of the key groups that push for**
    

- **Christ’s death.**
    
    Christ’s death then is, in some sense, a poetic victory. The fact that Christ got scapegoated for trying to expose scapegoating proves the point about scapegoating. Put it another way, Christ set up the perfect trap for the scapegoat mechanism. Either you do nothing, in which case more and more people will hear Christ talking about his message. Or you kill him, which is what they did, but in doing so, proved the very point that Christ was trying to make and spread his message even further. The very silencing of Christ became the loud voice that shouted his message.  
    As is the case with innocence, it’s not just Christ’s ability to access the core truth of human society in a vacuum, ex nihilo, but his ability to access that in the least hospitable of conditions that Girard sees as a sign of superhuman divinity. In the heart of the scapegoat mechanism, where reason has no power, where truth has no roots to grow, Christ was able to see and expose the violent truth of human society. Only a divine being, so Girard argues, can do so.  
    •
    

- Christ’s unconditional Love
    
    **0:37:31.8 JB:** The last and most important quality of Christ is his unconditional total love. This love, unlike his innocence or his ability to grasp truth, doesn’t necessarily directly tear down the scapegoat mechanism, but rather teaches us what to do when we find ourselves in it. When we are being victimized, or when we are doing the victimization, Girard tells us that there’s only one way out, and it’s captured by Matthew 5:43-44. Listen to this: **“Ye have heard that it hath been said, thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you.”**  
    Jesus’ prescriptions here is an extremely difficult one. If not only because this radical commitment to love and commitment to renounce violence must be done by everyone unanimously in order to end the conflict. But it is the only possible solution other than the violence, the deceit, and the lies of the scapegoat mechanism to stop an escalating war of all against all.  
    Perhaps we can at least take solace in the fact that Christ will eventually live up to his own word about unconditional love. Listen to this, Luke 23:33: “And when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, the criminals, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.”  
    At a point when everyone turns against Christ, when he is suffering tremendous physical pain, when he is at the end of his worldly life – the dominant emotion for Christ is still his love for others. “**Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”** As is the case with truth and innocence, it is not just the strength of Christ’s love, but the ability for him to love in such an inhospitable environment that Girard sees as evidence of true divinity.  
    And this makes me think of my period of study and practice in Buddhist monasteries in Nepal. One of the core tenets of Buddhism, and I’m being very simplistic here, is the love for all sentient beings. Not too dissimilar, perhaps, from what Christ is advocating here. And what I realized when I was practicing in Nepal holed up in the Himalayas is that it’s easy to love all sentient beings when you are holed away in a monastery without struggle or strife in the world. But as soon as you get back into the world, as soon as your ego and your spirit enters into competition with others, boy, is it hard to love. Christ then managed to show the greatest degree of love in the least likely of situations, when everyone is wrongfully blaming and hurting him – perhaps Girard is onto something with divinity after all.**To summarize, the crucifixion exposed the founding mechanism, mortally wounding it, by showing that the victim is innocent. The death of Christ confirmed and spread the truth of Christ’s teachings about the unjust and violent foundations of society. And the love of Christ gives us a way, however difficult, of preventing and dealing with the scapegoat process. It’s impressive already for Christ to have maintained his perfect innocence, to have grasped the full extent of the truth, and to have displayed an unwavering love. But the fact that Christ was able to do so in an environment that was completely hostile to innocence, truth, and love is what, for Girard, makes him the one true God.**  
    •
    

- An Anthropology of the Cross
    
    Girard’s interpretation of the Cross and the crucifixion of Jesus Christ is pivotal in his thought. He views the Cross as the culmination and revelation of the scapegoat mechanism that he argues is at the foundation of human culture. According to Girard, human societies have a tendency to transfer internal conflict and violence onto a scapegoat, an individual or group that is blamed for the community’s problems and then expelled or killed. This process of scapegoating restores harmony within the community, at least temporarily, by uniting the community against a common enemy. However, it also perpetuates a cycle of violence and victimization.  
    Girard sees the story of Jesus’s death as a narrative that exposes and undermines this cycle. Unlike the typical scapegoat, Jesus is innocent of the charges against him, and his death exposes the injustice and violence of the scapegoating mechanism. By willingly becoming a scapegoat, Jesus reveals the truth about scapegoating and its role in human society. His resurrection, for Girard, is a vindication that undermines the lie at the heart of the scapegoat mechanism. It reveals that the victim is innocent, and the cycle of violence based on lies.  
    For Girard, the message of the Cross and the Gospels is revolutionary because it calls for a recognition of the innocence of the scapegoat and an end to the cycle of violence. It invites a new way of building community not based on unity against a common enemy (through violence or expulsion) but on forgiveness, love, and an acknowledgement of the shared tendency toward mimetic desire and rivalry.  
    Girard’s insights have had a significant impact not only in theology but also in anthropology, sociology, and literary criticism. His interpretation of the Cross challenges traditional atonement theories by emphasizing the exposure and overcoming of the scapegoat mechanism as central to understanding the significance of Jesus’s death and resurrection.**0:41:29.5 JB:** There’s one last topic I wish to discuss today, and that is to finish painting Girard’s anthropology of the Cross, and to reflect on the type of Christianity that Girard has put in front of us. By anthropology of the Cross, I’m referring to Girard’s translation of the most important Christian phenomena into readily understandable cultural, psychological, and social language. To take Christian phenomena from the other world and to ground it in this world.  
    I began painting the picture here in Lecture 2 by arguing that the compulsive, prideful, unsatisfying metaphysical desire – the desire to be – was nothing but our original sin. I continued painting the picture in Lecture 3 by describing the Christian concept of the fallenness of the world, of a worldly evil, if you will, as really the psychological and social pathologies made necessary by our mimetic natures: Fetishization, alienation, bipolarity, masochism, oppression, and inequity. Let’s continue then in fleshing out this picture and translating more crucial Christian concepts into anthropological language.**Satan isn’t some scheming, conniving figure lurking in the shadows trying to bring down the worldly order – he is the worldly order.**  
    •