**1:21:42.0 JB:** If collective political action won’t save us, let’s see whether conversion is an adequate strategy to live in an apocalyptic era. Despite its Christian connotations, conversion is not an experience reserved for the religious, but simply the process of becoming disillusioned with the promise of metaphysical desire. Girard uses the term conversion much more broadly to describe “a liberation from desire.” In fact, Girard’s canonical examples of conversion are literary writers that have nothing to do with Christianity.

Through conversion, one sees through the vanity of metaphysical desire, naturally renounces the futile violence within mimetic rivalries, develops an identification and love for the other as false differences diminish, and is even imbued with a newfound “creative energy.” Post conversion or so Girard makes it seem, we can continue to engage deeply with society without being trapped in the pernicious games of metaphysical desire. Conversion is a fundamental transformation of spirit, where we are no longer prideful. Our energies are channeled into wildly creative pursuits, and we develop a genuine identification and concern for others. While this may seem too spiritual, I think we can all recognize instances of conversion (even if it does not go to the heights that Girard is suggesting here) in our own lives. Think about stories of letting go of a competitive career to spend time with family. Think about realizing the vanity of status games and stepping away. These are all steps in the direction of conversion.

Conversion is precisely what we need. But for Girard, it is not reproducible for three key reasons, and thus is not a reliable solution we can just recommend to anyone.

First, the requirements for conversion are extremely specific and intimate. Girard has this to say: “In reality, no purely intellectual process and no experience of a purely philosophical nature can secure the individual the slightest victory over mimetic desire… For there to be even the slightest degree of progress, the victimage delusion must be vanquished on the most intimate level of experience; and this triumph, if it is not to remain a dead letter, must succeed in collapsing, or at the very least shaking to their foundations [our core conception of self] everything that we can call our ‘ego,’ our ‘personality,’ our ‘temperament,’ and so on.” That is to say, conversion relies on a rare experience that fundamentally changes what we conceive the self is or could be. And, yes, if this dissolving of the ego sounds a lot like what you see in Eastern spirituality, Girard himself makes the comparison to Nirvana. Prima facie, such an intimate and Copernican event, should make us suspicious of its reproducibility. We can’t just tell people to go out there and get enlightened.

The second reason for why conversion is not a reliable, reproducible solution is that the conditions for conversion cannot be pursued directly. What is necessary to produce such a strong, life-changing experience is a “fall”. Failing a company, having your heart broken, losing a loved one, you need to suffer through the pains of desire to shake your ego down. Since the fall is defined by, above all, failure, it cannot be pursued directly. It is not as if one can work towards a fall in hopes that it will lead towards conversion, for then it would cease to have the necessary destabilizing shock. Instead, the fall must result from a genuine and intense metaphysical desire that is inevitably thwarted.

The third and last reason that conversion is not reproducible and reliable is that even when both of these conditions for conversion are met, it is still, to some degree, not up to us whether we do convert. We are still faced with the choice to deepen our pride or to renounce it, to enact violence on the rival, or to seek reconciliation. Unfortunately, this choice is not completely up to us and will be determined, at least in large part, by the models we have been exposed to at a young age. Old habits die hard and old models haunt us for our entire lives.

It should now be clear why conversion cannot be prescribed any more than winning the lottery can be prescribed. Not only do you need to fail monstrously to the point of collapse, that failure has to expose the lies of mimesis and shake your ego to the core. And only if you have been mediated by the right models – then and only then – do you have even the possibility, the chance of escape. Conversion then is an act of grace, given to the fortunate, but not something we can make meaningful strides towards ourselves.