- Crist
    
    First, societies would descend into chaos, a mimetic contagion. Then, a scapegoat would be unconsciously chosen to inherit all the blame and be killed. This is the founding murder. This founding murder would bring back a peace so miraculous that people attributed the saving force to the victim, deifying it. The pagan deity would be defined by its power while being both good and evil – causing and ending the chaos at the same time. Myths would be created out of this event, and out of these myths spawned the core institutions of pagan society: prohibitions prevented violence, and rituals acted as release valves for violence.  
    Both the scapegoating and deification are equally deceitful in pagan religion. The victim neither had the power to cause nor end the chaos – it’s all a psychological projection by the crowd, grounded on nothing but unanimity. And importantly, this deceitfulness is always occluded by myth, because myth is written from the perspective of the persecutor. The persecutor writes from the perspective of the crowd. And from that vantage point, all of this would seem real – the blame, the praise, the deification are all deserved and not mere projections. Importantly, none of this could be revealed  – because gods, pagan gods, would lose their power if people realized that it was they themselves who through unanimity projected that power onto them.  
    •
    

- Introduction
    
    When I was a kid, I used to march around my religious studies classes thinking I was brilliant for rejecting biblical ideas. I used to say things like, “Moses didn’t really part the Red Sea” or “Cain and Abel weren’t real historical figures,” and “These stories didn’t literally happen.” And so, I dismissed them for decades.  
    But discovering Girard was a turning point for me, and I started **taking the Bible seriously, if not literally.**  
    For example, Girard showed me how the same Cain and Abel story that I’d always dismissed revealed a pattern of mimetic rivalry that was showing up in my own life. And whether literal or not, I saw how these stories spoke to the constants in the human condition.  
    Furthermore, I learned how every Westerner bathes in the waters of Christian thinking. And Girard shows us that even secular philosophical assumptions of modernity, like say – the concern for victims – are Christian through and through. And to the extent that Christian ideas like compassion sometimes feel obvious. It’s not because they’re trivial, but because they’ve been so influential.  
    So I hope that Girard’s unorthodox reading of Jesus Christ will help you see Christianity in a new light, as it did I.  
    •
    

- Christianity a bridge between pagan society and the apocalyptic
    
    In the last lecture, we’ve discussed our past: pagan religion. In the next lecture, we’re going to understand the present, modernity, and the lecture after that, we’re going to discuss the future, apocalypse. Christianity then is the rupture which bridges our pagan past with our modern present and apocalyptic future.  
    If modernity seems eerily similar to the pagan societies that we’ve discussed last lecture, but also clearly distinct in important ways, then you can thank – or perhaps blame – Christianity for that distinction. In so far as our society doesn’t resemble the violence, the deceit, the arbitrariness, the injustice of pagan society – that all comes from Christianity.  
    For Girard, Christianity is the one true religion amongst a sea of false gods. It is the pivot point where history gets taken out of a cyclical view and thrown into a linear trajectory. It is a necessary fulcrum for us to lean against if we are to grasp the direction and meaning of history and to make sense of our present. That is why understanding Girard’s Christianity is the focus of this lecture.  
    •
    

- The Myth Vaccine
    
    The story of how pagan religions are formed presents to us an immediate problem: doesn’t this track the biblical story of Christ quite clearly? After all, there’s a civil unrest when Christ gets into Jerusalem. What is that if not the mimetic contagion? There’s clearly the unjust scapegoating of Jesus and murder on the cross. That’s the founding murder. There’s a resurrection and divinization. There’s a mythologization through the Bible and an institutionalization through the Catholic Church and its many varied rituals and prohibitions. So how can the Christian story be true, but the pagan religions be false?  
    Girard’s answer is that the Christian story is gonna have the same form, because Christ is also gonna be scapegoated, but with one crucial difference. The Christian story will be told from the perspective of the victim.  
    ◦
    

- Religion to end all religions, a myth to end all myths, a founding murder to end all founding murders
    
    What the Bible is doing is to tell the same type of story **as pagan religion has, but from the other perspective. Not the persecutor, which all pagan religion has been told from,** but the victim, and in doing so, exposing the lies of all religions to show that: the victim is innocent, that the crowd is guilty, that there is no sacred power, that all of that was merely psychological projection. The Bible for Girard, paradoxically, is a religion to end all religions, a myth to end all myths, a founding murder to end all founding murders by exposing their violent, their unjust, their deceitful origins.  
    Christ knows that reason alone, that an analytical articulation of the scapegoat mechanism, like the one I’ve just provided you, is not enough to shake societies out of this perennial cultural practice. What we need is an equally compelling story that shakes us into a new moral framework that automatically identifies with the underdog, makes us automatically side with the victim – and in doing so, see through the lies of the scapegoat mechanism and all of pagan religion.  
    The Bible then is a myth vaccine. And so the strategy of many modern Christians – to show that the Bible has nothing to do with the old myths, that it is radically different – Girard believes is misguided. Take something like the Epic of Gilgamesh, one of the first known myths of Mesopotamia. Modern Christians often blush at the many similarities between the two: there’s a quest for the fruit of immortality from a tree of eternal life. It exists in both the Epic of Gilgamesh as well as the Bible. There’s a deceitful snake eating the fruit and robbing us of our immortality. And there’s a great flood from which only the chosen are protected. Girard would say, don’t blush, and don’t try to distance the Bible from these myths. The Bible is effective and true because of its proximity – or more precisely, a key difference in its proximity. Let’s look at some of the stories in the Hebrew Bible where this intuition of the victim’s innocence is already starting to take root.  
    •
    

- Cain and Abel
    
    Let’s examine the foundation of the first worldly society as told by the Hebrew Bible. It’s a story of Cain and Abel, and the story goes something like this. Cain and Abel are the sons of Adam and Eve. Cain is the firstborn, he’s a farmer, and Abel is the second born, he’s a shepherd. They both frequently offer sacrifices to God. God, however, constantly favored Abel’s sacrifices over Cain’s. And so one day in the fields, out of jealousy, Cain murdered Abel. Upon seeing this, God condemns Cain, punishing him to wander the lands. This is what God says, Genesis 4:12: “**A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.” Cain is frightened – he’s worried that people who know him and what he did will try to kill him for his transgressions, for his crimes against Abel. So God puts a mark on Cain to protect him. God says this, Genesis 4:15: “Therefore, whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold.”**  
    Such is the founding story of the Canaanite community. Despite the superficial similarities – the warring brothers, the sacrifice, the expulsion – we can hopefully see that this story is different from pagan founding myths in the most subtle but important of ways.  
    ◦
    

- the victim is innocent for the first time
    
    The first big difference is that the victim is shown to be innocent and the act of killing is unjust. Take the case of the founding of Rome, another society founded by a murder of brothers. While the killing of Remus by Romulus may have been presented as regrettable it is nonetheless justified by Remus’ transgressions. Romulus only killed Remus after Remus jumped over the legitimate barriers that Romulus had set up around his city to mock and humiliate Romulus. Remus is really guilty. He is guilty of hubris and transgression and Romulus was justified in the killing even if it was regrettable. Abel on the other hand, is shown to be an innocent, upstanding servant of God, not deserving any punishment. Cain’s murder is not justifiable. There is no reason at all other than Cain’s envy which motivates this killing. The most telling sentence is the first thing that God says to Cain after his murder. God says this, “Where is Abel, thy brother?” Of course, God knows where Abel is, he’s God – this isn’t a question, this is a deep moral condemnation. Especially the second part, “thy brother.” The founding murder of the Canaanite community then is shown to be unjust and Cain was punished to wander because of it.  
    ◦
    

- Violence dose not end but brings more violencs
    
    The second big difference between this story and that of pagan myths is that violence does not bring about peace in the story of Cain and Abel, but just more violence. In pagan mythology, the peace that immediately follows from the expulsion is taken to be the final word – think about Oedipus and the peace that visits Thebes upon his expulsion. Think of the Hymn of Purusha that we talked about in the last lecture. How the sacrifice of Purusha and dismemberment became the foundations for an orderly, worldly Hindu society. In the case of the Canaanites, violence does not lead to peace but only begets more violence. What dawns on Cain after his murder is not peace but an immediate awareness that other people will now try to kill him for killing Abel. This is why God put a mark on Cain. And this mark of Cain, which God put – that whosoever should kill him will have vengeance multiplied sevenfold – is a prohibition that is attempting to prevent this escalating violence.  
    But of course, all prohibitions, all legalisms fail over time. Cain’s grandson would go on to kill a man and a boy and go on to declare that if Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, then he should be avenged seventy-sevenfold. I think it’s helpful here to imagine Cain’s grandson standing over the body of his victims, thumping his chest and saying, “whosoever shall kill me shall be avenged seventy-sevenfold,” which of course is just Old Testament speak for, “come at me bro.” What began then as a rule pronounced by God to prevent revenge and reciprocal violence, this sevenfold protection on Cain within just three generations has become a war cry, “I shall be avenged seventy-sevenfold” declared by a man and not God. What is important is both the escalating scale of violence from seven to seventy-seven, but also who says it and to what end. God says it to prevent violence, Cain’s grandson declares it to invite and seek violence. The prohibition against the blood feud has become the logic of the blood feud.The message from the story of Cain and Abel is clear. The victim is innocent, the murder is unjust, and a culture born of violence must return to violence. The civilization might flourish initially, but the violence will be inadequately contained by the legal barriers deriving from the founding murder.  
    •
    

- Joseph and His Brothers
    
    **0:14:19.1 JB:** Let’s look at another biblical story to see whether we can still find these differences from pagan religion. And that’s the story of Joseph. Joseph’s story goes something like this. Joseph was the 11th of 12 brothers, a favorite of his father. He was wildly envied and resented by his brothers. And not, I would wager, completely without reason. He kept interpreting these dreams that indicated the other brothers would be subservient and bow down to him. As a result, the brothers, annoyed enough, eventually expelled Joseph, selling him into slavery.  
    Where he found himself a servant to one of the Pharaoh’s ministers. Joseph was continuously seduced by the minister’s wife and continuously refused until she, out of anger and desperation, accused falsely that Joseph was the one trying to have sex with her. Joseph was expelled again and put into prison, but because of his charm and ability to interpret dreams, found himself soon the cupbearer, the right-hand man to the pharaoh himself, governing Egypt.  
    By happenstance, Joseph is reunited with his brothers, who do not recognize him. He sets up a trap to test the resolve and character of his brothers by threatening to enslave the twelfth and youngest brother, Benjamin. Upon seeing this, one of the older brothers, Judah, volunteers to sacrifice himself in place of Benjamin. Seeing that they have changed and matured, Joseph reveals his identity, forgives them, and the family reunites.  
    Again, there seems to be a superficial similarity to pagan myth here, the hubris, the expulsion, the sexual crimes, the interpretation of dreams, the trials, the family feuds. But it is also different in the most important of ways.  
    The first point of marked difference here from pagan mythology is that both acts of expulsion are painted as unjust, even if the same acts in pagan mythology were more than enough to justify victims’ expulsions. The first expulsion, where the brothers sell Joseph off to slavery, was not completely without reason. And that reason was Joseph’s hubris. He was annoying, right? Pagan characters were legitimately expelled for much less: Oedipus’ hubris for thinking he can tempt fate. Remus’ hubris for transgressing his brothers’ boundaries. And yet, despite this fact, Joseph’s expulsion into slavery is described as unjust through and through. It’s not his hubris, but his innocence that is emphasized in this story. This is what it means to be coming from the perspective of the victim and not the persecutor. It’s a paradigm shift in moral perspectives. Girard has this to say to the second expulsion, where Joseph is imprisoned on false charges of adultery. Girard comments how the charge put on the head of Joseph of trying to seduce the minister’s wife is symbolic of incest – because the minister treated him so well as if he were his father and so his wife would then be a maternal figure. Of course, we know too well from Oedipus and the rituals of African kings that incest is so often a charge put on the victim. Well, here then, this canonical charge is shown to be groundless as well.  
    The second point of marked difference between pagan myths and the story of Joseph is the ending. Judah offers himself as a sacrifice such that their youngest brother may be spared and go free. Gone are the days of vengeance. Gone is the cultural mores of expulsion. Joseph’s seminal act is not one of sacrifice and scapegoating, but of forgiveness. As a result, the characters of the story are not made sacred, deified like pagan characters – given a divine aura of power seeming more than human – they are simply humanized. The final scene ends with Joseph crying with his brothers – a deeply human sentiment. Genesis 45:14: “And he fell upon his brother Benjamin’s neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.” Like Jesus then, Joseph wept. What we get is not sacredity but humanity.  
    •
    

- The Incompleteness of the Hebrew Bible
    
    The Hebrew Bible is filled with stories like this from the perspective of the victim.  
    You can even argue that the story of the Jewish people centers around the victim, where the founding story revolves around Moses and the way that the Jews are exiled from Egypt. The story of Moses is told from the Hebrew perspective, which is the perspective of the scapegoat.  
    Right. I think that’s a good example, because here again, we find that the roles are reversed. The expulsion of Moses is not the founding event of Egypt, the persecutors, which it would be in pagan myth, but it’s the founding story of the Jews who are the victims.  
    In pagan myth, the violence to the victim is either justified as in the case of Oedipus, or whitewashed if not forgotten as in the case of the Hymn to Purusha. But what it can’t permit is to have the violence shown to be unjustified. These are the exact stories then that appear in the Hebrew Bible that tell us of the innocence of the victims, the injustice of the expulsion, and the delusion of the crowd. The key intuition that Girard sees brewing in the Hebrew Bible is captured quite well by a poetic verse in Psalms 40:6:**“Sacrifice and offering, thou dost not desire… Holocaust and victim thou hast not required.”**  
    The Psalms are an anthology of Hebrew religious hymns, and this line is clearly meant to be sung in praise of the Hebrew God. It is praising the Hebrew God for not wanting the sacrifices and victims like the gods of yore.sd,.  
    However, for Girard, the rejection of sacrifice only remains but a muffled intuition in the Hebrew Bible and won’t develop into a fully articulate and resounding message until the arrival of Jesus. Girard has this to say,  
    “**Throughout the Old Testament, a work of exegesis is in progress, operating in precisely the opposite direction to the usual dynamics of mythology and culture, and yet it is impossible to say that this work is completed**.” Girard, as many Christians do, find the Hebrew Bible incomplete in both its form and its content.**In its content, Judaism does not fully renounce sacrifice and violence. The God of the Hebrew people still receive sacrifices from Cain and Abel. He still demands the sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham. He still used the Red Sea to destroy the Pharaoh’s army. He still cast plagues upon Egypt as divine punishment. He still unleashes the flood of Noah against immorality and impiety.**  
    In its form, **the Hebrew tradition still clings to the pagan logic of legal prohibitions and rituals**. Its fault is legalism.  
    The same legalism that is unable to contain the violence of Cain, and the same legalism that will eventually contribute to Christ’s death. After all, who were among Christ’s persecutors, if not the Pharisees and the Scribes, the Jewish legal authorities?  
    •