**0:23:52.0 JB** On December 25th, 1923, René Noël Théophile Girard was born as the second of five children to a catholic, learned mother and an anticlerical, archivist father in Avignon, France.

Girard’s father had served, he lost a brother, he had been wounded himself in World War I and passed his views on the meaninglessness of conflict onto Girard. And I think this view was further corroborated as Girard spent his formative adolescent years in France under Nazi occupation. Now of course, as anyone growing up in that place and that time period, the cruelty of the Nazis left an imprint on Girard. But so did the cruelty of the French resistance. You see, once they had been liberated by the allies, the French resistance, now in control of France, started scapegoating and persecuting anyone who had tangential affiliations to the Nazis during the time of occupation. Often these victims were innocents. Many innocents, mostly women too vulnerable to defend themselves, were scapegoated by the French mob – blamed for Nazi collaboration. They were humiliated, dragged around on the street, and often killed without trial on groundless accusations.

Let me read you the vivid scenes depicted by Girard’s biographer: “Some of them were young mothers with no means of support, motivated by hunger and need rather than by treason or even desire. Some were unmarried school teachers who were forced to meet with German soldiers in their homes. Others were restless teenage girls who just flirted with the foreign soldiers. One was a charwoman who cleaned the German military headquarters. There were no trials – only stylized rituals of retribution, a shameful carnival that often included stripping these women to their underwear and loading them onto trucks to drive around the town. They were exhibited to the sound of drum rolls, shouting, and catcalls, as if the trucks were tumbrils and 1789 [the French Revolution] had come alive again.” These scenes of innocents being scapegoated left a lasting imprint on Girard and became a common thread throughout his work – both the meaninglessness, deceitfulness, and arbitrariness of conflict and the perennial need of troubled human societies to find innocent victims to blame and murder for catharsis.

Now, Girard’s intellectual trajectory on the other hand could be described as anti-institutional and unorthodox through and through – he was always an outsider. He was an outsider from the very beginning – unable to bear regular school, he had to go to a private tutoring program, reading at his heart’s content and not to the dictates of any syllabus. He was trained in Indiana University in history, but his generative curiosity soon overflowed the boundaries of his diploma. He made little contributions to history and was self-taught and an outsider in all the major fields that he did actually contribute to. First, he made his mark in literary theory by articulating the idea of mimesis through close readings of literature. Next, he jumped disciplines into anthropology, where he shed light on the need for scapegoating. And then he jumped disciplines once more to theology, mounting a serious defense for Christianity.

Despite being accepted into the prestigious French Academy and holding professorships at John Hopkins, Buffalo, and Stanford – Girard still remains, to some extent, an outsider in all of these disciplines. The literary theorists have beef with him for not respecting the methods and conventions and fashions of the day. The anthropologists distrust his liberal use of evidence and lack of fieldwork. And even parts of the Christian community have shunned him for his quite unorthodox reading of the crucifixion.

**0:27:42.3 DP:** The title of this lecture series is called Interpreting Girard, Exegete of Apocalypse? Why do you call him an “exegete”? Why not “philosopher” or maybe something more provocative like “prophet”?

**0:27:55.3 JB:** That’s a good question. We’re not in the business of drama here. So I think I skipped “prophet” but mostly I call him an exegete because that’s what he called himself and I wanted to have respect for his self-conception. You see, he explicitly, in interviews, rejected both terms, philosopher and prophet. And I think it would just simply be too narrow to call him a literary theorist, an anthropologist, or a theologian. Now, an exegete is someone who performs exegesis – the interpretation of scripture. And I think that is the most accurate way to understand Girard’s system and the vast terrain that he’s forced to traverse. He is less a careful, analytical philosopher but a visionary expanding and articulating a moral insight informed by scripture through all these domains.

I get a feeling that reading Girard, for him these vast domains weren’t these divergent disciplines, these separate buckets that he was dipping his toes into, but simply different manifestations of the same core insight. And I think Girard’s aim wasn’t to revolutionize literary criticism, anthropology, or theology, but to articulate what he conceived to be, the core insight of Christianity.