**1:27:21.2 JB:** But there is one last solution Girard offers us as individuals living in the end times that can be reproduced. This does not require grace and can be willed by us. Recall, conversion is a way to exist within the community, to live, to love, and create in it. It is the ideal state, a state that if everyone obtained would bring forth the kingdom of God on earth. But for those of us, most of us, not lucky enough to be given such a treasured gift, Girard’s suggestion is simple – withdraw. Withdraw from the world. Leave the world behind. Tend to your own garden. Proximity is the problem of modernity. There’s nothing we can do about social proximity – we’re all equals now – but we can create physical proximity by leaving society altogether.

Girard’s example par excellence of withdrawal is going to be found in Friedrich Hölderlin, the 19th century poet, a contemporary of Hegel, Schelling, and Fichte. Hölderlin is someone that Girard brings up because and not despite of his strong metaphysical desires and pride. Girard diagnoses Hölderlin with an extreme pride that he wanted to be a Goethe or nothing – Hölderlin was not lucky enough to be blessed with conversion. But that is precisely what makes him attractive for Girard – if withdrawal works for even such a mimetic person, then it must work for all. And withdraw Hölderlin did. For the last 40 years of his life, Hölderlin retreated into a tower where only few of his friends visited him, cutting himself completely off from society. Girard attributes to the withdrawn Hölderlin a quiet mysticism, tranquility, and even holiness.

This withdrawal is so central to Girard’s prescriptions that he takes it to be a defining characteristic of Christ. The command, “Imitatio Christi”, to imitate Christ for Girard, is a heed to leave society. Like Christ, who does not imitate any man, so must we refuse to imitate. What’s equally important is to refuse to be imitated. Girard comments that Christ, I quote: “Withdraws at the very moment he could dominate.” Girard’s point is this, at the resurrection, when his divinity, when Christ’s divinity, is apparent to all, when Christ could have founded an empire on earth, he left. So too must we then humble ourselves in front of others and refuse to be a model by refusing to be too close to society. And it’s only at this distant and withdrawn place – refusing to imitate and refusing to be imitated – can we see truth and practice love. The first commandment to direct one’s gaze towards God is incomplete without the 10th commandment to divert one’s gaze away from others.