**00:59:17.0 JB:** Girard’s reading of capitalism as driven by spirit instead of reason and appetite explains a whole host of behavior puzzling to classical economics with its homoeconomicus reading of human nature. For example, in the 2000s and ’90s, the dominant view of China’s relationship with the West was of greater harmony through economic liberalization. The belief was that China’s rise would lift the boats of the world economy and that economic similarity would lead to political harmony. At the peak of Chinese optimism however, in 2007, Girard says, nay, the reason nations compete is the same reason individuals compete – similarity instead of difference. Being more similar, having the similar ends between US and China, will cause more rivalry and make both sides erect false differences. And even if China’s rise will make most in the US have absolutely more material goods, spirit is what drives capitalism. And so it’s more the relative rather than absolute standing that Americans will care about and will feel threatened by the rise of China. Girard has this to say: “The looming conflict between the United States and China has nothing to do with a ‘clash of civilizations.’ We always try to see differences where in fact there are none. In fact, the dispute is between two forms of capitalism that are becoming more and more similar.”

But conflict is fine, right? After all, doesn’t capitalism thrive from rivalry and channel it productively? It does. But only when law is there to constrain it. Capitalism is dependent on law. But as we discussed earlier on, law is dependent on an entity with a monopoly on violence. Capitalism and law work fine within a nation, as your example of Jeff Bezos peacefully suing Elon Musk goes to show. But between nations, where there is no monopolistic power, that is where the breaking point is, global trade will be the arena where violence erupts. And so, at the height of Sino-American optimism in 2007, Girard not only predicts the falling out of these two nations, but also correctly observes that the very mechanism others thought would bring together these two nations – global trade – would be the exact point of conflict, anticipating the trade wars of the 2020s. Girard: “A conflict between the United States and China will follow: everything is in place, though it will not necessarily occur on the military level at first… Trade can transform very quickly into war… From this point of view, we can reasonably fear a major clash between China and the United States in the coming decades.” Let us now examine what such a war in modernity between two colossal nation-states would entail.