**0:09:05.6 JB:** The first step of the scapegoat mechanism is mimetic contagion. It sees groups descend into frenzy as metaphysical desires run rampant and mimetic rivalries multiply. Modern society is much more susceptible to mimetic contagion because of proximity.

The first type of proximity is spatial/temporal proximity. Whereas it was hard to enter into competition or even know of – much less be envious of – people beyond your town or village in the old days, modern technology and transportation has greatly accelerated the breaking down of physical distance between peoples. The slogan of social media companies like Facebook of “connecting the world” is not a celebratory declaration for Girard, but a terrifying damnation because it renders all of us as capable of competing with each other. I can compare myself so easily these days and be competitive with my friend all across the world, whether it’s Milan or Beijing, through Instagram.

The second type of proximity that has also been reduced is social proximity – most substantive forms of social difference have broken down. The whole host of prohibitions which used to create social differences among people – whether it’s gender norms or caste systems or aristocratic hierarchies or guild systems, have been obliterated by our ideal of equality. Whereas before we told our kids that they have to follow in specific professions according to their lineage, we now tell them, you can be whatever you want to be. Whereas before certain goods were reserved for certain castes, we now demand access for all. We no longer believe that there is any essential difference between anyone, between people, and that what one person deserves so does everyone else.

While Girard believes that breaking down of social differences is an ultimately good thing, it’s an extension of Christian love, he’s also incredibly worried because we are much more envious and competitive. These prohibitions, however oppressive for Girard, acted as barriers to prevent metaphysical desire from spreading too rampantly. Without these barriers, desires just travel much more feverishly in the population, leading to mimetic contagion much, much more easily.