**1:10:38.6 JB:** These all sound so bizarre to us after World War I and World War II. We do have a code of law now that governs war, but this doesn’t carry much cultural weight – we’ve simply resorted to the most efficient forms of killing. There are no real rules anymore. To us, it seems so odd to tell your opponents where you will go, to let them pass by on a vacation, and not to shoot someone because it was unpleasant – today warfare is all about domination. How to use every method, every arrow in our quiver to inflict greatest damage with the most minimal loss. So what has changed between our era and the era of gentleman’s wars?

Girard sees the inflection point between modern war and the gentleman’s war in Napoleon. Napoleon came to power towards the end of the French Revolution, and throughout the revolution what fundamentally shifted was the philosophy of war. Before the French Revolution, Europe generally was at ease with war in some sense. War was thought of as a normal state of affairs waged by professionals – usually aristocratic officers for whom military service was just another phase in a varied career, not unlike how you’d go start a company now, but later on you’d be a venture capitalist, just another phase in your career. The Napoleonic era saw three radical changes from this European ideal. First, the prestige and power of the old nobility along with its attitude towards and involvement in war diminished. Second, the enlightenment assumption of war as an extraordinary aberration took hold. War was no longer a common state of affairs, but a barbaric interlude which gave people greater normative justification to commit atrocities in the name of ending wars. And third, an apocalyptic view of war as either total victory or total defeat started gaining momentum. Whereas there was a form of dignity given even to the losers of war, if you were defeated you often could just go home and sometimes were even honored by the victors – now people believed that the enemy was out for total extermination.

This change in the philosophy of war can be summarized as the stakes of war being heightened – and these extraordinary ends started justifying extraordinary means. War was no longer a profession, a team sport, an institution among others in society – it became total and enveloped all aspects of society. For the first time in modern history, the Jordan Law of 1798 introduced total mandatory conscription – before that, armies were usually filled by mercenaries, aristocrats, and maybe localized conscription. But even for non-combatants – those who weren’t conscribed in this new paradigm of total conscription, war started taking on a total form. Married men made munitions, women created clothes, the old telled tales of glory.

And this blending of civil society and the military resulted in increased civilian casualties and further oppression of conquered peoples. After all, it’s not just the military that is the enemy now. It also resulted in more grotesque tactics like scorched earth policies, and this intensified cruelty, engendered coordinated attacks by already conquered civilian peoples, most notably in Spanish guerrilla warfare, which Girard sees as giving birth to modern terrorism.

With Napoleon then, we are already far away from the gentleman’s wars. As the stakes of war increased, warfare became more about exterminating the enemy at all costs instead of respecting rituals and prohibitions that gave one honor. Today, these cultural frictions have all but fallen to the wayside. War is no longer an institution with checks and balances, but conforms to its abstract concept of domination.