**0:37:14.7 JB:** Let’s take this back to the transition from ritual to law. I suggest that we should understand this transition from ritual to law as a shift of what actually brings about peace. In rituals, peace is primarily brought about by catharsis and prestige, and only partially by the threat of violence, whereas in law, peace is primarily brought about by the threat of violence, and only partially by catharsis and prestige.

Let’s say you were the wronged party and were not satisfied with the outcome of a sacrificial right or a ritual – say you weren’t happy with the outcome of the trial by combat, or the sacrifice didn’t give you enough catharsis – what is the cost of taking vengeance into your own hands? Well, because there’s no central authority, the cost is somewhat low, right? It’s simply the resistance of the guilty party that you’re trying to take vengeance on and any future reciprocal violence. Because there is such low cost for you to continue killing, it’s basically one guy and his friends that you have to worry about, rituals really need to make sure that you are satisfied with the outcome of the rite. And the way rituals do this is twofold. First, rituals aim to give you – the wronged party and the angry party – catharsis. This is why ritual sacrifices often seem so unnecessarily cruel, like the pharmakós’ ritual, where the entire community participates in harming and humiliating the victim before killing the victim. Its cruelty is not tangential, but central to why rituals work – so that you get your cathartic release and have no more desire to seek vengeance.

The second way that rituals make you satisfied with the outcome of the ritual is that rituals are grounded on immense prestige such that even if you don’t feel catharsis, you feel social pressure against exacting vengeance. Let’s say you’re a wronged party and challenges the guilty party to a trial by combat. Even if you lose and you don’t feel catharsis – the outcome of the trial by combat may be seen as the will of some god, and so there is immense prestige given to the outcome of the rite, even if it goes against your favor. You feel compelled to respect it, even if you aren’t satisfied with the outcome of it.

To summarize then, rituals bring about peace primarily by making wronged parties feel catharsis, and by grounding the outcome of the ritual on prestige – whereas the threat of violence for exacting revenge is actually quite minimal. Law flips this on its head, primarily stopping violence with more violence and only partially using prestige and catharsis.

Think about it this way. Our judicial system does indeed generate some level of catharsis. Girard thinks that the state is acting in our stead and exacting vengeance for us, which may give the wronged party some release. I think this idea has some bearing because after the guilty party has been sentenced, you often hear the wronged party state that “justice has been done.” And furthermore, the way we do our sentencing and build our jails is also reminiscent of the type of expulsion of ritual sacrifices, where we cast people away from society. And I think the legal system does serve a primarily cathartic function in very public cases. Look at how social media reacted to the sentencing of the cop who killed George Floyd – there were celebrations all around of the cop’s conviction – it was a hugely emotional, cathartic, national event. But I think for less public cases, catharsis is not the primary reason that the legal system works. And I don’t think it’s prestige either. Girard thinks that the legal system does indeed enjoy some amount of prestige and respect, but certainly not enough to prevent violence on its own.

What really ends violence for our judicial system and makes it so effective is the threat of more violence. Let’s ask the same question. In today’s society, if the wronged party were not happy with the sentence given by law to the guilty party and decided to take vengeance into their own hands, what is the cost? Well, the cost is almost infinite, because it’s not just the guilty party and the guilty party’s friends who will come after you, but the entire state that will cast you as a criminal for taking justice into your own hands. For Girard, this is what grounds the efficacy of law, that there’s nothing we can do about the conclusions of law.