**0:11:21.5 JB:** Of course, as we discussed, mimetic contagion leads to strife, it leads to suffering, it leads to anger, it leads to a spirited malaise that requires an equally spirited and irrational solution: catharsis. Before Christ, groups used to attribute all the blame to a single, relatively innocent scapegoat and in an act of violent expulsion, achieve catharsis and peace. Blame the entire plague on Oedipus, cast him out of the city and found a new order – that was the pagan logic.

Surely, this must be exposed by Christ, right? Surely we can no longer commit as egregious acts of scapegoating as blaming the entire plague on one man. Surely, you must give us this much, right Girard? Yes, but that is not a good worldly thing.

Girard reminds us that what is constant is the level of catharsis we need to feel peace. And thus, the degree of blame remains the same – we still need to find someone to blame for all of society’s problems. What’s changed is how many people we need to blame to be convinced. Christ has made us less gullible. Indeed, we can no longer believe one single person is to blame for everything. If blaming the plague on one man’s patricide and incest engendered peace in Thebes, I’m afraid it can engender nothing but laughter today.

Because we are less gullible, for the same magnitude of blame, we need many more victims. We need to up the dose because we are more aware of the effects. We can no longer believe that one single man can single-handedly cause all the problems, but the Soviet Union could still believe that an entire class of people were the cause of humanity suffering, and Nazi Germany could still believe that an entire race of people were responsible for their national collapse. This is Girard’s terrifying conclusion. I read to you: “Entire categories of humans are distinguished — the Jews, the aristocrats, the bourgeois, the unfaithful, the faithful — and we are told that utopia depends on the necessary condition of the elimination of the guilty categories. As the power of the mechanism breaks down, sacrifices at a larger and larger scale must persist to achieve the same calming effect. Before we could bring peace by sacrificing a goat or a few men, but now we must kill an entire race, religion, class — the eradication needs to be total.”

Truth did not make scapegoating any better. It made it much worse. Whereas the pagan mystical mind could have been satisfied with a single man being responsible for calamity, the modern rational mind is not as gullible: it needs entire classes of men to be expelled.