**0:13:40.4 JB:** The most laudable force that comes out of the Christian revelation and the destruction of pagan culture is love. This love stands in stark contrast to the Greek notion of Eros. Eros is marked by two qualities: First, a fundamental concern for oneself rather than the object that is loved. And second, Eros is limited often to a select group of individuals or objects.

**0:14:04.3 DP:** You know what’s coming to mind here is that I wonder if romantic love is an example of both of these qualities. So let me explain what I mean. First, that romantic love is, as you’re saying, clearly limited to one person. Just think about how much in our world we prize monogamy in the modern West but there’s a second point here that modern dating is often less about the other person as an end in themselves and more about using the other person actually as a means to look cool or to make you stand out and be proud and confident. But the problem with that is that you’re not loving them for who they are, but you’re loving them for what they do for you. And when that’s the case, it kind of reminds me of buying clothes or something where it’s less about love. It’s a transaction.

**0:14:59.7 JB:** I think that is a good modern example of Eros. And I think your intuition is spot on there that there’s something perverse about Eros because it’s a concern for the other that really isn’t a concern for the other. It’s a concern for the self disguised as the concern for the other. The love that the Christian revelation has unleashed on the world – Christian love, agape – is not like this at all. It’s different on both points. It’s fundamentally, one, a concern for the other for the sake of the other. And two, importantly, it’s undiscriminating. It is a love that stems from identification with the other and expands to all humanity.

The reason that Girard thinks Christianity is responsible for this agape love are obvious. Christ’s defining quality, the one he asks us to imitate, is his unconditional, unwavering love. Furthermore, the destruction of rituals, which legitimized catharsis and the violence and anger and hate that followed catharsis, also led to the growth of love.

But most importantly, it was the collapse of prohibition, of social difference – the breaking down of arbitrary distinctions among men that led to this love taking root in the world. In societies that have been touched by Christianity, we are no longer primarily Brahmin or Shudra, man or woman, German or Italian. We are first and foremost human. We are equals, and Christianity is this equalizing force. Framed negatively, the love predicated upon difference – say the concern a lord has for his subjects and serfs, or the serf’s loyalty to the lord – it is incomplete because first, the scale of it is rather limited – our social roles only have us have responsibilities towards so many people. But second, the love that stems from one’s own social roles stems from a fundamental concern for oneself and is in a deep way prideful. My concern for you, my serf, is rooted in me wanting to maintain my own self-conception as a good lord. The love predicated upon difference, then, is Eros, whereas the love predicated upon Christian equality is agape.

And so much of our society nowadays is underpinned by this Christian love and the unique Christian concern for the victim, what appear to be secular concepts, secular intuitions, secular institutions. Once we look under the hood, so to speak, we will find Christianity underneath.

**0:17:44.0 DP:** To what you’re saying here, we live in a Christian society and we don’t even know it. Take the idea of human rights. It’s self-evident, right? And that’s why it appears in the Declaration of Independence. That’s the wrong way to think about it. The idea of human rights, it’s downstream of the idea of Imago Dei, which is the biblical idea that every person, no matter what they look like, is made in the image of God and therefore has inherent worth. So it’s Christianity, it’s Christianity that inspires the famous line from the Declaration of Independence, which says, and you’ve heard this before: we hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal. But the craziest thing is that the same secular people who dismiss Christian values, those are the same people who are the most passionate defenders of human rights. And what’s funny about it is they’re in some sense the most religious of all and they don’t even realize it.

**0:18:42.7 JB:** I think that’s right, that most people don’t realize the true source of where their ideas really stem from. But I don’t think it’s just concepts like equality and human rights that you’ve identified that’s downstream Christianity. Take this phenomenon that I find quite curious, adding “big” to anything in our society automatically makes it bad: big tech, big pharma, big philanthropy. And I think this is another Christian concept. This goes to show how the Christian moral paradigm of protecting the victim, protecting the little guy is so steeped into our culture. It’s really everywhere.

And Girard identifies so many different institutions as well as modern intuitions that are really Christian in essence. For example, he sees Christian love and the concern for the victim as operating in domestic institutions. Let me give you a quote: “Since the High Middle Ages all the great human institutions have evolved in the same direction: more humane private and public law, penal legislation, judicial practice, the rights of individuals … When viewed in terms of the large picture, this social and cultural evolution goes always in the same direction, toward the mitigation of punishment, greater protection for potential victims.”

But that’s not it. Girard also sees this love as operating in foreign affairs. I quote again: “When a catastrophe occurs at some spot on the globe, the nations that are well off feel obligated to send aid or to participate in rescue operations. You may say these gestures are more symbolic than real and reflect a concern for prestige. No doubt, but in what era before ours and under what skies has international mutual aid constituted a source of prestige for nations? There is just one rubric that gathers together everything I am summarizing in no particular order and without concern for completeness, it’s this: the concern for victims.”

Even our refusal to declare our achievements, Girard believes, is an achievement of the Christian concern for the victim. This is how pervasive it is. Let me quote one more time: “We can compare ancient societies to one another, but the global society now in the making is truly unique. Its superiority in every area is so overwhelming, so evident, that it is forbidden, paradoxically, to acknowledge the fact, especially in Europe. This prohibition stems from the fear of a return to tyrannical pride. It is also the fear of humiliating nations that don’t belong to the privileged group. In other words, it is once again the concern for victims that dominates what it is permissible and impermissible to say.”

Hidden uneasily alongside Girard’s anticipation of apocalypse then, is a restrained but nonetheless fundamental affirmation of modernity that can easily be missed between Girard’s dense lines on violence. As these passages show, Girard praises modernity wholeheartedly. He answers a resounding “Yes!” to the question, “are we the best society that has ever been?”