**0:46:05.4 JB:** In the same way we understood our legal system by tracing a genealogy to ritual, let us understand the institution of capitalism and global trade by tracing a genealogy back to gift-giving.

Contra our popular conceptions, before currencies were invented, societies didn’t operate under barter – I’ll take three sheep for your cow – but under gift-giving – I see that you, my neighbor, are hungry and I offer to give you a few eggs. And I think this makes intuitive sense. Bartering and exchange is rather cold and impersonal and not suitable in early societies that had a small and tight-knit social fabric. Even today, in environments with a strong social fabric, the exchange of goods and services operates less on the logic of barter and more on the logic of gift-giving. We don’t go to our close friends or coworkers and say, I will work on your spreadsheet for three hours if you promise to walk my dog for two days. We offer to walk dogs, we offer to help with spreadsheets based on the strength of the relationship. But we do keep some kind of tally, right? You can’t just keep asking me for favors the whole time. But it’s not the immediate bartering system that we may have in mind. It doesn’t need immediate reconciliation.

Girard makes two interesting observations about gift-giving that will help us better understand capitalism.

The first is that while there is a substantive portion of gift-giving that was about material aid, the dominant logic of gift-giving was often about spirit and not appetite. It was about what gift-giving said about the gift-giver instead of how it helped the receiver. Girard has this to say: “Among the Kwakiutl and other Northwestern Indian tribes, great chiefs used to demonstrate their superiority by giving away their most precious possessions to their competitors, the other great chiefs. They all tried to outdo one another in their contempt for wealth. The winner was the one who gave up the most and received the least. This strange game was institutionalized, and it resulted in the destruction of the goods which the two groups, in principle, were trying to give to each other, just as most human groups do in all kinds of ritual exchange.” As this example shows, gift-giving, which may have originated from neighborly help, transformed into a social competition. And there are so many examples of this, including how gift-giving started wars and how some, after receiving a gift so good that they had nothing to reciprocate with, committed suicide or killed the gift-giver because they were so humiliated.

**0:48:47.0 DP:** These points about gift-giving remind me of modern day philanthropy where often at universities, for example, people will put their names on the building. And outwardly, they’ll be all about the good. They’ll be about, “Oh, I believe in what’s happening at this institution. I really believe in education and so I’m going to give a building.” But really what ends up happening is once they see their name on the building, they get to put their shoulders back and feel the sense of tremendous pride. And what they get from that is so often them not giving to the university, but them giving to themselves.

**0:49:19.3 JB:** I think that’s a funny modern equivalent, whereas the tribal chiefs were giving, but not for the gift-giver’s sake, but for their own sake by showing how much they had to spare. It seems like you’re suggesting that the same logic happens in modern-day gift-giving in philanthropy. But I think it’s not just about the habits of giving in modern society, but any form of material exchange – as we discuss extensively in celebrity advertisement, material exchange is often not about material goods at all, but about what they say about us.

Going back to gift-giving in early societies, the second interesting point and what will be different from modern capitalism and trade is that gift-giving rituals always had a temporal gap between gift and counter-gift. And furthermore, the value of the gift couldn’t be wildly different, but also couldn’t be exactly the same. It’s obvious why the value of the gifts can’t be wildly different, you can’t have one person taking advantage of the other, but the values can’t be the same either, because that implied that you wanted to break a relationship off with someone. If I have a friend who, say, asks me to fix his car, I may be offended if he constantly asks me for favors like that without reciprocating. But I may also be offended if he offered to pay me immediately and insistently, because it implies that our relationship isn’t strong enough to have that trust of future reciprocation. A zeroing of the balance sheet implied a breaking of that relationship.

What about the other point, about the temporal gap? Well, there had to be a temporal gap between gift and counter-gift for the same reason – to show that there was trust in that relationship instead of a clearing of the balances immediately. In my life, at least, the closer the relationship, the less urgent I am in settling accounts after, say, a dinner. If it’s someone I’ll never see again, it’s imperative that we pay for both our own dinners, but if it’s a good friend, I might just get the whole bill without thinking too much about it, because he’ll likely do the same for me in the future.

**0:51:27.5 DP:** I’ve experienced this too. I was once on a trip with a friend, and for the first 24, 48 hours, we were Venmoing back and forth, $12 here, $17 there, and I was the one initiating it. He was like, “Dude, stop doing this.” He’s like, “We’re not Venmoing each other anymore.” And at the time, I thought it was weird. I thought it was really jarring. But looking back, I understand why. The need to settle the accounts, as you were saying, to always bring that balance back to zero, it implied this implicit break in the contractual nature of a friend, like two people who just care for each other. And the second that you start accounting for debts, the relationship just devolves into a transaction.

**0:52:09.1 JB:** That’s exactly right. The need to immediately zero the accounts implies that the relationship itself is not strong enough. But there’s another reason to widen the temporal gap between gift and counter-gift, and that is to prevent violent escalation. As the example of the Kwakiutl chiefs showed, gift-giving can be extremely passionate and spirited – and it is best to have some gap in between to cool off the spirited energies.

Let’s summarize. What’s important for gift-giving for Girard is that, first, material exchange is often not about material at all and is about a social display that could lead to violence, because there are so many prideful energies involved. And second, gift-giving had to be done with temporal gaps in between with objects of differing value.

The transition to modern-day capitalism then, can be understood as the introduction of money, which takes away this second quality of gift-giving. When we buy things with money, it is both instantaneous as well as the exact same value. This breaks the relationship and prevents an escalation of violence. Money then is to exchange what law is to human relationships. Just as law atomized us, which allowed us to interact much more frequently with a much more diverse set of people, money also atomizes us. It takes this ledger of gift-giving, which used to be governed and intimately entwined with relationships, and ends it with each transaction bringing the balance to zero. The same story for law here applies to money as well. Whereas before, so much of our functions in life were governed by relationships, now they’ve been substituted by some more mechanical and immediate process.

But make no mistake, capitalism, like gift-giving, is still mostly about social displays and less about actual material goods for Girard. It’s still about spirit and competitive energies that could lead to violence. The relationship between capitalism and gift-giving then, is the same as the relationship between law and ritual – in that, by atomizing individuals, it allows us to interact much more frequently, trade has accelerated. So while the actuality of violence has diminished, the potential for violence has increased. Girard probably has something like this in mind. In tribal societies, only a very limited set of goods were traded or gifted, and at very infrequent intervals. But in modernity, almost everything can be bought by money, and the pace of exchange is much, much faster. This increases the surface area of competition.

You may say then, that with capitalism and law, we never have any true peace which only violent catharsis can bring about. What we have is superficial peace covering an ocean of violent energies. We are in a state of suspended polarity that could burst at any moment.

Capitalism and capitalistic competition then, is a guard against violence because it atomizes us, but it’s also a generator of violence because it increases the frequency and surface of trade.