**1:05:05.9 JB:** The third major force that gets introduced by Christianity is innovation, the creative ability for genesis.

The fact that we are the most innovative culture is so obvious that I won’t even bother giving too many examples here – space flight, modern medicine, nuclear weaponry, political systems, gender norms, money – Western civilization at least in the past 300 years is defined by and prides itself with change. With probably little surprise at this point, Girard thinks that Christianity is responsible for our innovative capacities, because it provides the cultural firmware, if you will, for innovation. That firmware is summarized in one utterance by Girard. I quote: “The main prerequisite for real innovation is a minimal respect for the past and the mastery of its achievements, i.e., mimesis.” There are two key ideas captured in this one sentence.

The first is captured in the word “minimal.” A minimal respect for the past. Girard is heeding against an exaggerated worship of the past here. What is not conducive to innovation is the reactionary idea not uncommon throughout most history – perhaps most famously amongst Confucians and Christians – that our best days are behind us. And the best we can do is to blindly imitate the past and press the brakes on the downward trajectory of history. Under such a worldview, the very word “innovation” had very negative connotations in the West up until about the 18th century. Its connotations were so negative because innovation implied a deviation from a sacred, albeit static and rigid ideal provided by myths of yore. Innovation was “practically synonymous with heresy” before the 18th century. Such an exaggerated respect of the past is often grounded on a religious belief in a mythologized past. Christianity frees us from this blind worship because it is a force, according to Girard, that tears down myths. It reveals to us what we once thought of as immutable, as arbitrary.

**1:07:14.3 DP:** In terms of what you’re saying, I see this in the ahistoricism of Silicon Valley. And people there are so oriented towards the future that they have this hubris sometimes that the past doesn’t matter. And I think it’s really interesting how the most innovative place in the world has the least respect for its own industry. And I’ll explain what I mean. If you talk to people there, they’re freakishly intelligent. They pride themselves on the expansiveness of their knowledge. They just know so much about the world. But then they know surprisingly little about the roots, the origins of their own industry. But I’ll compare that to something like, I don’t know, the oil industry or something. And the oil industry is more slow changing. And people there, they have this reverence for what came before. They understand their history deeply.

**1:08:06.6 JB:** I think that’s a quite interesting and relevant correlation that you drew out between Silicon Valley and the oil industry, that the more innovative an industry is, the less historically aware and respectful it seems to be. And I think that’s precisely the correlation that Girard is trying to draw out with the first half of that sentence, that a minimal respect for history is required. Because we all need to have this, as you coined it, Silicon Valley hubris, to not believe that our best achievements are already behind us in order for us to all have a future orientation.

But there’s a second idea here, and that’s captured in the word “respect”. Importantly, Girard does not say disrespect, but a minimal “respect”. We must have enough reverence, or at least curiosity, to see history as worthy of engagement. What Girard is heeding against here is the exaggerated progressive idea that the past has nothing to teach us, that we are so much better, that we ought to bring down anything tainted with the stench of the old.

What does this “respect” allow us to do? Mimesis. It allows us to imitate the past and master its achievements. And herein lies Girard’s most interesting views on innovation. I quote: “In a truly innovative process, it is often so continuous with imitation that its presence can be discovered only after the fact, through a process of abstraction.” How can this be? After all, Girard is seemingly drawing out a connection between imitation and innovation. Yet we all conceive of imitation and innovation to be polar opposites. How can this be?

What underlies this claim is Girard’s understanding of innovation as always proceeding internally within a system. We, as humans, never create anything meaningful ex nihilo. Let me read you the passage that surrounds the original quote: “Real change can only take root when it springs from the type of coherence that tradition alone provides. Tradition can only be successfully challenged from the inside. The main prerequisite for real innovation is a minimal respect for the past, and a mastery of its achievements, i.e., mimesis. To expect novelty to cleanse itself of imitation is to expect a plant to grow with its roots up in the air. In the long run, the obligation always to rebel may be more destructive of novelty than the obligation never to rebel.” Girard is making a Burkean conservative point here. That tradition, despite its many flaws, has a degree of wisdom and coherence that we must rely on to build meaningful things. As individuals, we need to stand on the shoulders of giants and we can’t simply create ex nihilo any more than a plant can grow with its roots in the air. And so with this idea of innovation – at least meaningful innovation – as internal to a system, it’s clear why innovation is synonymous with imitation. After all, how else do you understand all the intricacies of a system without learning and imitating?

History is littered with examples where repetition, replication, imitation is a necessary precondition for innovation – think about Goethe, who was a master of reproduction, reproducing the great poetic forms before he began to pioneer his own. But not just artistic innovation, Girard reminds us that industrial innovation follows a similar pattern. I quote again: “It began with Germany, which, in the nineteenth century, was thought to be at most capable of imitating the English, and this at the precise moment it surpassed them. It continued with the Americans in whom, for a long time, the Europeans saw mediocre gadget-makers who weren’t theoretical or cerebral enough to take on a world leadership role. And it happened once more with the Japanese who, after World War II, were still seen as pathetic imitators of Western superiority. It’s starting up again, it seems, with Korea, and soon, perhaps, it’ll be the Chinese. All of these consecutive mistakes about the creative potential of imitation cannot be due to chance.”

This surprise of innovators, when they’re imitators, when they’re “copycats”, suddenly innovate in their own right – is perhaps a modern phenomenon. It is because we draw a false dichotomy between innovation and imitation. Let’s take a look at two historical examples that we take to be polar opposites, but I think will reveal the same form: Jack Ma with Alibaba and Einstein with general relativity.

In the 2000s, many thought of Alibaba as but a copycat of eBay or Amazon. But transplanting an entire business model to a different country is not just about mere regurgitation – there are different customs, there are different needs, there’s a different regulatory environment, such that they had to adapt the business model considerably, which necessitated innovation. It’s a little surprise then that in the 2010s, Alibaba genuinely started building completely new business models that did not exist in the Western tech ecosystem. And today, their entire careers in Silicon Valley made by observing leading trends in the Chinese technology ecosystem, most of which in consumer, and applying that or seeding similar companies in the US. On the inverse, we think Einstein’s theory of general relativity is truly original, but he did not create it ex nihilo. Such a naive view occludes the years upon years of study, of training, of understanding, of imitating classical physics, which Einstein improved upon. These two activities which – in our modern mind – could not be further apart, reveal the same form, study and imitation, which leads to mastery, which leads to genuine and meaningful innovation.

This project, interpreting Girard itself, is an example of imitation being identical with innovation. I was trained in a historical philosophical approach where the philosopher in training learns by reconstructing the arguments within the canon, and not just philosophizing ex nihilo in an armchair. But reconstruction is not just regurgitation, because you are burdened with interpretive freedom. Go read Girard and then come back to these lectures. Go read Hegel and then go to Kojève – you’d be surprised at how much innovation has to come from the interpreter: there’s restructuring, excluding, highlighting, adding, giving examples.

To summarize then, the necessary perspective for real innovation is a delicate tightrope between a reactionary idolization of the past and a progressive rejection of the past – we need to revere it just enough to learn all of its secrets, but not so much that we don’t feel licensed to make improvements. This delicate, delicate balancing act allows us to properly imitate those whom have come before us and in mastering their achievements, become masters and innovators ourselves. No act of innovation can be entirely done from a vacuum and thus must involve some degree of imitation. And no imitation can be adopted without being adapted and thus must involve some degree of innovation.