**0:34:13.2 JB:** The second force that Christianity injects into history, which reaches its pinnacle in modernity, is truth. Like love, it is one of our great triumphs. In fact, these two forces, truth and love, as we’ll soon see, are inseparable. What does Girard have in mind when he talks about the increase and proliferation of truth? There’s too many things that I can bring up here. There are the countless victories of science, the mastery of travel on land, air, and sea. There’s the victory over disease and starvation, the dispelling of illusions and myths. But I think Girard also has in mind the way reason has gained prestige. Look around our world. Everything is, or at least claims to be, grounded on reason. Social political theories all gain legitimacy not through divine mandates or hereditary lineage but appeal to reason. Our system of law is not based on God’s prohibitions but claims, at least, to be the product of reason, however fallible. Reason also has not been as heavily praised or rewarded in industry than it has now in our knowledge economy.

More so than almost any civilization, we appear to value knowledge more and believe in reason’s ability to obtain it. Far are we from the Garden of Eden’s prohibition against the tree of knowledge. Far are we from the intellectual humility of Job. Far are we from the lessons of Oedipus that knowing more can lead to disaster.

So what caused this proliferation of truth, and who’s responsible? It should be no surprise that Girard’s answer is Christianity. This may seem an implausible answer initially. Indeed, we often pit Christianity and reason, certainly science and Christianity, as against each other. Girard’s answer here then, is as interesting as it is counterintuitive. The first negative way that Christianity brought forth truth is that it dispelled myth. This should be a familiar idea at this point. Christianity exposes the deceitfulness of worldly foundations and begins to tear down prohibitions, rituals and all pagan religions. And it is only when we cease to look for truth in myth does reason even have the fertile ground to bear the fruits of truth. After all, if something is already explained by a wildly, wildly prestigious myth that it’s fatal for me to question, then reason will not even want to begin to question it. I think Girard’s interlocutor sums up his views very nicely. I quote: “It is really Christianity that makes science possible by desacralizing the real, by freeing people from magical causalities. Once we stop seeing storms as being triggered by the machinations of the witch across the street, we start being able to study meteorological phenomena scientifically.”

Girard tells us that “the disappearance of religion is a Christian phenomenon par excellence” because Christianity was the original truth-seeking discipline that sought to dispel false religions. In this view, modernity’s concern for truth is more Judaic than Athenian. In fact, Christianity not only foresaw, but in some sense actively brought about its own demise, as the content of Christianity – the pursuit of truth – started to rebel against the religious form of Christianity. Science then, for Girard, is the patricidal son of Christianity. “Patricidal” because it unjustly scapegoated Christianity – rejecting all of it and not just the religious form. “Son” because science is a Christian discipline through and through, continuing the tradition that Christ began of accessing truth and dispelling myth.