**1:30:45.0 JB:** We may find Girard’s only actionable prescription of withdrawal deeply unsatisfying. First, Hölderlin’s contemporaries found him far from the ideal of holiness that Girard attributed to him. He was devoid of companionship. He was characterized by anxiety rather than peace. It’s not clear that withdrawal does protect us. Second, Girard ironically succumbs to the escapist flaws the younger Girard found unsatisfying in Eastern religions:  Girard says this as a critique, “The nonviolence of Eastern religions is the search for a position outside of violence, nirvana, etc. But this comes at the price of all action. But this search abandons the world in a way to itself.” But these are the exact problems that Girard himself runs into by prescribing the Holderlinian option. Lastly, we may ask, what good is whatever love we manage to develop withdrawn if this love is so far from being able to help others?

I don’t think Girard found this final solution that satisfying either. But at the end of the day, Girard has no choice and if he is right, neither do we. Apocalypse is imminent. If we don’t withdraw, we’re going to get sucked right up into the mimetic frenzy. This is how certain Girard was of the end of the world. I quote: “Christ will have tried to bring humanity into adulthood, but humanity will have refused. I am using the future perfect on purpose because there is a deep failure in all this.”

The kingdom of God, while a logical possibility, is a statistical impossibility. Apocalypse is coming. There is no hope for collective salvation. The only thing we can do is to preserve our own integrity by withdrawing in order to make ourselves worthy of salvation by God in the next life. In the ’80s, after describing our predicament, someone asked Girard, what is to be done? And all that he said was, “We might begin with personal sanctity.” During a lecture in Paris, he was asked the same question and he simply just answered, “pray”. Girard does not give us any worldly solutions because there are none. The kingdom of God will not be established here on earth, but perhaps we can preserve ourselves to be worthy of it in heaven.

Perhaps, the only worth asking question then is how do we know when the end is near? I can’t help, but call to mind these Marxists of the Frankfurt School who have a set date where capitalism is going to end, exact eschatological predictions are, I think, are not good for much beyond humor in retrospect. Girard is not engaged in this Mayan type of business of having a specific date. Instead, he points us gently back to Matthew 24.

“For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places. All these are the beginning of sorrows. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.”

Girard looks at our world: what is the earthquakes and pestilences that Matthew refers to, but the ecological challenges we’re facing. What are these geopolitical fault lines and trade conflicts, but the rise of nation against nation. What are the ones who persecute in the name of victims, but the false prophets who shall deceive many. And what is our increasingly toxic cultural landscape, but the iniquity that causes the love of many to grow cold.

And to that we may add, what is Girard’s work, but the last preaching of the gospel for an unreceptive world. The end is not near. The end is here.

I will leave our listeners stewing in the same unbearable silence that Girard left me stranded in. The final sentence in his final book reads, “In 1815, the Congress of Vienna was still able to put an end to the War of the Sixth Coalition. That era is over. Violence can no longer be checked. From this point of view, we can say that the apocalypse has already begun.”