**0:18:51.7 JB:** In the absence of ritual, law is going to be the key modern institution to contain and limit violence. Girard has this to say, I quote: “Sacrifice has languished in societies with a firmly established judicial system — ancient Greece and Rome, for example. In such societies the essential purpose of sacrifice has disappeared. It may still be practiced for a while, but in diminished and debilitated form … Ritual in general, and sacrificial rites in particular, assume essential roles [only] in societies that lack a firm judicial system.”

As a descendent of ritual, law takes its place and serves the same function as a ritual, to prevent reciprocal violence from destroying a society. Recall in Girard that a likely outcome of society is reciprocal violence, where strands of localized violence balloon up to engulf an entire society or continent in the case of the Trojan War. In early human societies, even if people had a well-developed social conscience, that is, a system of moral notions as this is right, that’s wrong, there was no such thing as punishment of a crime by the society. If one person injured another, it was left to the injured party to seek vengeance. Obviously this repeats ad infinitum.

Ritual and law then both try to resolve this escalating reciprocal violence by first, prolonging the time of response, making sure that rivals don’t exchange punches too frequently, leading to escalation. Second, they also try to contain this vengeance and violence by clearly demarcating what violence is justified and what isn’t. In law, for example, the violence that is justified is the violence of the state to sentence or kill a criminal. In ritual, violence is redirected but also contained to a particular space or time. In sacrificial rituals, like Aztec human sacrifice, violence and resentment were channeled to the victim. Only the blow that kills the victim is justified, is sanctified. In festivals such as the Bacchanal or the Carnival, violent energies were contained to that single day. The only acceptable form of violent expression was on the day of the festival. Let me give you another example. In another type of ritual, trials by combat, as dictated in Germanic law, where two opposing parties with irresolvable claims would fight to the death with the victor having gained the “right”, this is also an attempt at containing that vengeance and that violence by saying: hey, let’s don’t go about trying to kill each other every day, but let’s focus and narrow down our violence in this one date, time, and place. Let’s just battle it out to the death and see who wins.