**0:38:11.0 JB:** But there is a much stronger and positive reason that Christianity is responsible for the proliferation of truth, reason and science beyond just the negative dispelling of myth and clearing the fertile ground, so to speak. And that reason is none other than love. Girard has this to say, I quote: “Love is at one and the same time the divine being and the basis of any real knowledge. The New Testament contains what amounts to a genuine epistemology of love.”

Girard is arguing for a strong causal relationship here, that love – the first force we described – is a necessary precondition for truth. But why is that? Why is love a necessary precondition for truth? We conceive of truth as a self-standing activity. Why does love – a relation of people – matter for truth? Well, when I frame it in that way, the Girardian answer is quite obvious. The relationship between person and object, say it with me here, really represents a relationship between person and person. This is one of the fundamental conclusions of mimesis: mediation. This is what it means that we’re social creatures.

In order for my relationships with other people, to not mediate the truths I access, either positively or negatively then, I can’t either hate nor unduly fetishize any single person. I mean, think about when the condition of love is not satisfied. Think back to my college acquaintance. He felt resentment for his rich peers, which mediated him into an economically progressive position. And think about German society – they didn’t believe that Nazi’s values were true, but they simply aligned towards them because they were resentful of the hypocritical bourgeois. Nazism was not the truth for German society any more than economic progressivism was for my acquaintance. In both cases, the truth has been distorted because of resentful mediation among people. And of course, this works in the positive direction too. If I overly fetishize someone, if they want to – to use Girardian language here – acquire their being, then I might subscribe to their positions even if I don’t find them true.

Christian love, as we discussed, is not possessive and deeply desirous. And it certainly isn’t hate. It’s neither a push nor pull from the self. Because the self really isn’t in the picture here. It is a concern of the other for the other, which means that my own being, my own pride, my own self-conception falls by the wayside. When I love someone in this Christian way, it is a dissolution of myself which takes away the strength of metaphysical desire. And when we do this in an indiscriminate way, when we learn to love all – we become freed from mediation and we are free to pursue truth, whether that means our genuine desires or objective scientific inquiry. I hope this helps us make sense of Girard’s quote. Christian love is the place of objectivity then, because it is the only type of relationship where the self is not in view and where the relationship between self and other are in harmony. In love, we are not overly resentful or overly admiring of others and thus are not mimetically pulled by them.

This is all quite abstract, so let me give you a few examples. This is a story that I’ve shared before. I grew up idolizing entrepreneurs – the Steve Jobs of the world, and when I went to college, I felt like I had to drop out and start a company as soon as possible. So I did that. My freshman spring, I dropped out, raised a small round, and the company ended up crashing and burning out of vanity. And it’s not that I didn’t enjoy building companies, but the degree to which I desired it and certainly the urgency which I felt like I had to achieve it was disproportionate to my genuine desire. Dropping out was not my “truth”. When I did go back to school, out of resentment for my peers who had dropped out and built successful companies, I went the complete other direction. I rejected the worldly altogether, switching from CS to philosophy, going to a Buddhist monastery – for three years, I didn’t do that much at all in industry out of resentment. Again, it’s not that I didn’t enjoy philosophy and Buddhism, but the degree to which I pursued it and certainly the degree to which I renounced the world was not genuine. This was not my “truth” either. In the first case, I was unduly fetishizing of entrepreneurs and positive mimesis took me away from my “truth” – I should have just stayed in school and started working on side projects. In the second case, I was unduly resentful of entrepreneurs and negative mimesis took me away from my “truth” – I should have continued to keep a pulse on developments in industry while I explored philosophy.

The reason that I feel like I’m doing a bit better job now of balancing and finding my more authentic desires is because I resolved my deformed relationships. Before, when I met a philosopher or entrepreneur who was younger and more successful than I, I became both resentful and jealous. But now I can – to some degree, respect and affirm their life and wish them well genuinely, without exaggerated admiration or envy. And it was only when I first made peace with myself and made peace with the relations around me that I was no longer so strongly mediated by other people’s life decisions. It was in the place of love alone could I access truth and genuine desires.

Here’s another example. Whenever I get into a heated argument with a colleague, a friend, or a family member – no matter what they say, no matter what facts they present to me with, I always see my own side. Reason becomes my spokesperson and lawyer and reason can’t bring about a resolution by itself. I’ve found that in these scenarios, when I’m arguing with people, when there’s a feud, when I’m angry at them, the best way to resolve the conflict is to wait it out and just let the anger pass, or perhaps even to think about the good times I’ve shared together and develop a degree of affection towards them. The removal of that hate is primary, only then are you at a headspace to access truth and begin reconciliation. Spirit precedes reason – we are primarily social and not rational creatures, helplessly mediated by others. So what’s most important is getting our relationships right. Truth does not have the power to engender love, but love has the power to engender truth.

Let me not trivialize this with just individual examples from my own life. The same goes for society-wide issues as well. I mean, take a closer look at what polarization is doing to our society. I would wager that polarization, which effectively is an absence of love right, it’s seeing enemies in the other. It’s not just silencing the exchange of ideas, but it’s limiting the very formation of ideas. For different groups of people, certain ideas are completely off limits not just to share, but even to entertain because they are associated with the other side whom they so loathe. Many people on the left can’t even entertain that capital is genuinely bringing forth important technological innovations because these ideas are associated with the enemy. Similarly, many people on the right can’t entertain the idea that there are legitimate claims within social justice movements because those are the talking points of those whom they hate.

It’s not just normative political positions that are susceptible to mediation – intellectual positions can be off limits as well if we fail to practice love and respect. In Nazi Germany, for example, theoretical physics was devalued because it was considered a Jewish science. The point here is that even for the most objective and theoretical of disciplines, we can still form subjective biases based on what we think about those associated with those disciplines.

What we find in Girard’s epistemology of love then, is a solution to our perennial problem of mediation. How do we as individuals access our authentic desires and how do we as a society engage in meaningful dialogue? The answer is that we must have the right social relations in place before reason can even begin to access truth. We need to love.

Girard has a very famous but hard to decipher phrase. He says, “The invention of science is not the reason that there are no longer witch hunts, the ceasing of witch hunts is the reason science was invented.” This must be interpreted under the light of Girard’s epistemology of love. In a violent world, truth and science do not have the power to bring about love – here represented by the ceasing of witch hunts. No matter what facts you present to people, if they are angry and violent, they are gonna keep on killing. Only in a loving world where we have stopped killing witches can science and reason flourish. I encourage you to relate all of this back to my example of personal conflicts: truth does not have the power to engender love, but love has the power to engender truth.