**0:59:39.5 JB:** Last but certainly not least, Girard believes that the deification of science leads to a systematic rejection of certain types of truth. Perhaps I can summarize Girard’s position here like this: science confuses its epistemic limitations for an ontological theory. What I mean to say here is that one of the defining methods of science, verification, limits science to the study of objective/external/material phenomena. In the early days of science, that was fine because science confined itself to the study of external phenomena: astronomy, physics, et cetera. Yet as science became more successful and prestigious, it aimed to apply this criteria of verification on other domains such as psychology, social theory, but still only permitted external material phenomena to be used as evidence, thereby categorically rejecting whole domains of truth.

The best example of this is perhaps the behavioralists – John Watson, B.F. Skinner, those guys – who even in the most charitable reading, believe in the thesis that human behavior can be fully explained by appealing to externally observable phenomena, past behavior and interactions with the environment. Tools like introspection and the objects of introspection: mental states, emotions, concepts, representations, were thought of as causally irrelevant on the most charitable reading and perhaps non-existent on the least charitable reading. And I don’t think it’s a stretch to see the development of behavioralism as the dogmas of science and the scientific method as going too far where they don’t belong. When it comes to matters on the human condition, material external events are quite limited in how much they can explain. Introspection, intuition, subjective experience and maybe even religious revelation, this is the one that Girard cares a lot about, are much more important. Yet these types of “truths” have all been deprioritized, if not excommunicated in our scientific age. While the crude materialism of the behavioralist no longer represent the most sophisticated views in the academy, I think it has captured a large part of society. How many times have you heard this sentiment walking around Silicon Valley? “Oh yeah, we’re just a bunch of neurons firing. Oh yeah, we’re just atoms squirting chemicals.” This materialism is the default position for those educated in science – it certainly was for me. And I think, at the very least, it leads to a lot of nihilism and existential despair.

Do you see now, why I suggested we interpret Girard as saying that science confuses its epistemic limitations for an ontological theory? What began as “external material is all that science can perceive” – an epistemic limitation, became, with the behavioralists, as the best example, “external material is all that really matters.” Not unlike the historical church, which had a monopoly on what sources counted as the most important truths – namely, Scripture – the Church of Science also has its dogmas on what types of truths it does and does not consider as legitimate. Maybe it’s good that we don’t consider religious revelation as serious truths anymore, but we also, as an entire society, stop taking the fruits of meditation, introspection, maybe even philosophical inquiry and subjective experience as seriously. We want charts and graphs, we want studies and numbers, we want opinion polls and measurements. We gave up the types of truths that matter most to humans in exchange for truths that can be reproduced, falsified and verified.

Girard’s surprising conclusion here is that just as those who claim to fight for victims are the real persecutors of modernity, the staunchest rationalists and scientists are the most religious and dogmatic of all people in modernity.

Let me be crystal clear, Girard thinks that the development of science and reason are great things with fantastic achievements we should all feel proud of. In fact, Girard himself tries very hard to convince us that what he is doing for anthropology is science, like what Darwin did for biology. The problem is simply that reason and science have been deified, they’ve gotten out of hand. And this deification leads us to design poor societies, be exposed to disastrous political narratives posing under the guise of science, and systematically ignoring whole categories of truth quintessential to human flourishing.

But given Girard’s love for truth, perhaps what he fears the most from the hypocritical deification of science and reason is the problem with hypocrisy we just discussed, that it corrupts the original position and pushes people to the opposite. Girard is worried that politicizing and deifying science will delegitimize science altogether. Just as liberal hypocrisy spawned Nazism, perhaps Girard would attribute the rampant anti-intellectualism today as a response to the hypocritical parading of scientific dogmas over the heads of others. In the final analysis, then, what is most worrisome about this church of science and reason is that it threatens to push people away from science and reason altogether and towards a new dark age.