- Hegel’s Theodicy
    
    With these necessary pathologies of man and society in view, I wish to argue that Girard’s psychology is not just Girard’s psychology. He’s doing something much more specific, much grander, more ambitious, and ultimately impactful.  
    Girard is giving us a theodicy. A theodicy, I would posit, has four key movements or components. First and most primarily, a theodicy’s aim is to explain the origin of all evil. Where is its source? How does it manifest? What are the possibilities of escape? By doing so, second, theodicies also tell us something about the shape of the good – what can be achieved and expected from this world. And as a result, theodicies, third, reconcile us with the world. If not all theodicies can fully legitimize evil – to justify the ways of God to man, so to speak – at the very least, they can reconcile us in a limited way by explaining their origin. But beyond mere reconciliation, theodicies, last and most importantly, tell us how to feel and what to do about evil and injustice in the world. The same normative interpretation of phenomena, experienced in the light of different theodicies, creates very different reactions. Let me explain why theodicies are so important with two examples.  
    First, let’s look at Hegel’s theodicy. Hegel’s theodicy looks something like this. To the primary question on the nature of evil, Hegel would say that in modernity, all human evil, injustice, inequality, crime, are never a result of systematic perversions of our institutions but deviations from those institutions. If too many people, say, are being born out of wedlock and have deficient childhoods as a result, it’s not because there’s anything wrong with a two-parent nuclear family, but because we aren’t adhering to the values and structure of such a family enough.  
    This understanding of evil naturally tells us the shape of the good. It is encapsulated in his famous double sentence: the actual is rational and the rational is actual. What Hegel means here is that the actual values we already hold, most notably freedom, and the actual institutions we already have, the nuclear family, civil society, and the nation state – are fully rational. They’re fully good in some sense. Even if it may not seem so to us, our world is already fully hospitable to humanity’s most important ends. According to Hegel then, we are at an end of history where we have already achieved the full good – whatever evils that exist are mere deviations. It’s not hard to see how this reconciles us with the world – it does so by enabling us to affirm the world in its essence – that the modern world in its core design is good. And last but not least, this reconciliation is why the classical Hegel is often thought of as a conservative. There is no need for any normative or institutional revolutions. All that we need to do is institutional reform, to redesign and rejuvenate our institutions with the values and structures they already have.  
    •
    

- Rousseau’s Theodicy
    
    **1:13:22.7 JB:** Let me give you a different taste of theodicy. And for that, let’s look to Rousseau’s theodicy. There is a terrific book bearing that exact same name, Rousseau’s Theodicy, written by a philosopher that I had the great pleasure of studying with, Fred Neuhouser. Professor Neuhouser illuminated the overlooked significance and relevance of theodical thinking for me. And so you must read that book. I will but attempt a very clumsy summary here.  
    To the primary question on the origins of evil, Rousseau will, not unlike Girard, try to explain a whole kaleidoscope of human evil on a singular, intersubjective, psychological drive within human nature that is inflamed and improperly directed by society. Unlike Girard, Rousseau does not see human nature itself as necessarily fallen and corrupt, even if it is prone to corruption. The problem for Rousseau is not human nature in itself, but how this human nature has been channeled by society. That means that even if, contra Hegel, the good for Rousseau is not fully actualized today, it does not preclude the possibility of a social organization that does fully actualize the good and meet all of humanity’s ends. And thus, Rousseau reconciles us in a way much more limited than Hegel: he gives us simply the reason to hope. Even if we cannot affirm the world as it exists today – because it channels human nature in all these perverse ways and poorly designed institutions misguide human nature – we can affirm the world because there’s nothing about human nature itself that precludes a fully good and hospitable world from existing, however unlikely. And so we are instilled with hope. We are given a reason to pursue change. To the same question of too many babies being born out of wedlock, Rousseau might say something like you’re wrong, Hegel, that the nuclear family isn’t the right structure, but there is some right structure, or at least there can be some right structure out there. We need to start experimenting with different forms of familial organization, maybe like polyamory and open marriages, to make social progress. There’s little wonder then that with this type of theodicy, Rousseau is the father of progressivism.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Theodicy
    
    **1:15:40.2 JB:** Let us proceed then to Girard’s own theodicy. To the primary question on the origins of human evil, Girard, of course, attributes it to metaphysical desire – our prideful yearning for being. All of the pathologies that I have just described and many perversions which I haven’t find their root in metaphysical desire. Unlike Rousseau, however, these perversions are not accidental due to some poorly organized social arrangements, but essential to human nature. The shape of the good then for Girard also becomes clear. You can try all you want, you can try to redesign our society as much as you please, but you should not entertain the delusion, and it is a delusion, that we will ever be rid of these pathologies. There is a natural limit to how good our world can be. And so, to continue our example, to the question of babies born out of wedlock, someone with Girard’s theodicy might say something like, “You know, Hegel, you’re wrong in thinking that the nuclear family is the perfect structure. But Rousseau, you’re also wrong in your optimism in thinking that there can be a perfect structure, a right structure.” Whatever familial design we try, we will always have these pathologies plaguing us.**1:16:56.9 DP:** But why is this a form of reconciliation?**1:17:00.0 JB:** Yeah, that’s a great question. Indeed, the type of reconciliation I have in mind for Girard is not Hegelian – to show that the world, in its essence, is already hospitable, which engenders affirmation. Girard’s reconciliation is also not Rousseauian – to show that, even if our world is not a hospitable one now, there is nothing in the essence of human nature that precludes such a world from existing – which engenders hope and an impetus for action. Girard, you are exactly right, shows that evil is an unavoidable condition of human organization and will only be more powerful as history progresses – there’s very little that we can do. However, to answer your question directly, it is a form of a however limited reconciliation, because if seeing the world as fundamentally good (Hegel) engenders affirmation, and viewing the world as potentially good, (Rousseau) engenders hope, then depicting the world as irrevocably evil (Girard) engenders tranquility. We can look at the world and think: “This is just the way the world is.” And may even be able to help us appreciate the pathologies we aren’t as burdened with. Let me frame this positively. Such a view that Girard gives us frees us from the taxing obligation to always be looking at ways to better the world. This limited sense of freedom legitimizes a tranquil retreat – a tending to one’s own garden – which Girard will turn to as the last only possible solution to the apocalyptic moment we are in today.  
    This is perhaps, and I’m speculating here, why people who’ve met Girard describe him as peaceful, as tranquil, as contented, and even saintly. Let me read you a quote from Girard: “People think I’m some kind of wild monster because I don’t have any Rousseauist illusions about the natural goodness of man, but nothing teaches moderation like the theory of original sin, which is always the opposite of what its critics say it is. Because it always meets, Rousseau’s ideas, with disappointment in reality. The belief in man’s natural goodness always leads to the hunt for scapegoats. Indeed, on this point, the story of Rousseau himself and his descent into paranoia are quite exemplary.”  
    Girard’s point is that Rousseau is so pessimistic in actuality because he is too optimistic in possibility. Girard is then the exact inverse here. He’s so optimistic, or at the very least contented in actuality because he is extremely pessimistic in possibility. Because Girard believes in unshakable evil – original sin – he isn’t as surprised or angered or bothered by the actual evils of the world. Girard isn’t paranoid, looking for culprits everywhere because he understands evil as not coming from a few guilty individuals but from the very core of human nature. So this reconciliation, however limited, is nothing to scoff at. Because without it, we tend to become overly anxious, upset, and angry – Girard rescues us from Rousseau’s descent into paranoia.  
    •
    

- A Critique of Critique
    
    I hope you are starting to see the important practical consequences now of theodicies. Even if people have the same normative interpretation of phenomena, the example we’ve been using so far is that babies born out of wedlock are bad, theodicies greatly change how we relate and react to such phenomena. To put it very simply, theodicies are about our expectations of the world. Of course, we’re going to react differently to the same normative phenomenon if our expectations of the world and its goodness are different. And I would wager that in modernity, most of our disagreements on the political spectrum aren’t on the normative interpretation of phenomena, whether babies born out of wedlock is good or bad, but on what we can expect from society. We don’t disagree on reality as much as possibility these days.  
    I think Girard’s theodicy tampers the expectations of all forms of Rousseauian progressivisms and specifically inoculates us against a whole host of what we can call critical theories. Now, for the purposes of this discussion, by “critical”, I’m referring to theories with two conjoined movements. First, the theory aims to describe an injustice or pathology within society, and second, hoping that nothing other than that description engenders action and emancipation. It aims, these critical theories that we’re trying to discuss here, to go from critique directly to inspire change. Girard’s theodicy defangs these types of naive critical theories, not by arguing against them, disagreeing whether something is pathological or not, it takes the bite out of critical theories by unchaining these two movements. The mere description of a pathology is no longer enough to engender change because pathologies are shown by Girard to be inevitable.  
    Marxism here I think is one such critical theory because Marx himself described that he was not interested in making recipes for the cookshops of the future, for giving these positive visions of what a communist utopia should look like. Marx was content with mostly dedicating his work to a critique of capitalism, to show how capitalism generated numerous psychological and social pathologies, and hoped and believed that the critique in itself would have the normative force to engender proletariat revolution.  
    The most impactful, I think, of Marx’s critiques centered around the psychological pathologies that capitalism generates – a fetishization of objects of production, an alienation from the process of production, as well as the social pathologies created by what he called capitalistic exploitation: oppression and inequity.  
    Of course, by now, you should already be able to anticipate Girard’s answer here: if fetishization – attributing surplus value onto objects – is part of our psychological constitution, then Marx, while warranted in identifying production relations as that which channels fetishization, was incorrect in concluding that they were also its chief cause. The Girardian says something like, show me a society where people do not unduly fetishize a set of objects, be it capitalistic, religious, political, or cultural. Show me a society where there isn’t some form of oppressive coercion. Show me a society where inequity, real or psychological, has been eradicated. The reason you can’t is because these pathologies are made necessary by our human nature and not by capitalism.  
    Girard would say: Marx, even if you are right about the pathologies within capitalism, you are mistaking the channel of these pathologies for their root causes. And, therefore, you shouldn’t expect these pathologies to just go away in so far as you change the economic structure. And I think, unfortunately, this was the story of communism in the Soviet Union where it first took root. Fetishization was simply redirected from objects of production to charismatic Russian leaders. Alienation was alive and well, perhaps even worse, in the cold Soviet state apparatus. Oppression indeed no longer came from the demands of a factory owner, it now came from the often more unreasonable demands of a central planning committee. Inequity was no longer bolstered by the surplus value capitalists took from their workers, but it reemerged as a form of hoarding by Soviet party members.  
    Of course, Marxism isn’t the only thing, but just a good example that I brought up, in the cross-hairs of Girard’s Theodicy. You think private property and political liberties is going to help? It might emancipate you from the feudal lord, but they themselves will be your new ball and chain. You think patriarchy and religious traditionalism has kept you oppressed? Well, just look at the horrors committed in the free-love hippie communes of the ’60s and ’70s. You think the internet will bring about a free, connected, and truthful world? Well, look at how it’s being used for surveillance, division, and the spreading of lies. And you think cryptocurrencies, by the nature of them being decentralized, will grant access for all and finally give us an equitable financial market? Well, go look at that Gini coefficient of Bitcoin.  
    Any form of critical utopianism is doomed to fail because human nature and not any form of political, social, cultural organization is the real root of evil for Girard. You are only rubbing ointment on the skin. Given enough time, the perversions of human nature will infiltrate and corrupt any such structure.  
    Of course, Girard’s theodicy does not preclude any form of progress or change whatsoever. There are different intensities of these pathologies – it would be ridiculous to say, “Slavery? Well, there’s oppression everywhere. We’ll just have to live with that one.” The very pathologies that Girard brings up can act as a productive basis for constructive conversations – how are they being channeled today, who is being harmed, how do we limit their inflammations, what limitations and side effects are we going to run into if we push too hard for change? These conversations, however, will look very different from the critical projects today that seem content in pointing out all the pathologies of society. Against the backdrop of Girard’s theodicy, these projects carry very little force – you’ve simply shown me that what is necessary does indeed occur. You’ve shown me that 1+3=3+1. You’ve shown me that that bachelor over there is indeed unmarried and that the triangle over there does indeed have three sides.  
    Girard’s theodicy then, is an inoculation against critical sentiments all too common in our society today. To throw out the baby as soon as the bath water gets a little bit lukewarm, that wants a revolution at the first glimpse of discomfort and wants to change everything at the first slight. What Girard provides us in his theodicy is a powerful critique of critique. That is to say, putting a limit on the forcefulness of critical projects, for if we are astute interpreters of the world and human nature, we will see that pathologies will always be with us, no matter what we do.  
    In many ways then, Girard is a converse Marx. Philosophers have tried too hard to change the world, the point is to interpret it.