**0:14:20.9 JB:** In pagan society, the peace which the victim’s expulsion brought about was attributed to the dead victim. He is deified and made ultimately good and evil for bringing about but also ending the chaos. Since Christ, this no longer happens at all for two important reasons.

First, the pagan victim can be both good and evil because in the pagan moral paradigm, the dominant pole was power. The primary distinction we draw between people and beings is powerful and powerless. The victim-now-God in pagan society is powerful and can use that to both good and evil. In the Christian moral paradigm, the dominant pole is morality. It’s not power, it’s been switched to morality – people are either good or evil. And so, no victim can be divinized because in order to do so, to make them “good”, to turn them into a god, we have to admit that they are essentially good. But doing so incriminates the persecutors – if they are essentially good, why did we kill them in the first place? The pagan answer to this was, well, the victim was a powerful being. It is evil and caused the plague, so our killing was justified. But it is also good and ended the plague, and so that’s why we now worship them. This ambivalence is no longer available in our Christian moral framework.

But even if we were still in the pagan moral framework that permitted ambivalence, we would not be able to create any more deities because Christ showed us the deceitfulness of the scapegoat mechanism. At the height of scapegoating, when we are caught in the mimetic frenzy, bolstered by the unanimity of all, we might still be able to believe in the guilt of modern victims. But as soon as the dust settles, and we are in a less frenzied and spirited state, the Christian moral framework – and its suspicion of the mob and concern for the victim – allows us to quickly decode the injustice of what had just happened. Just as we did do for the victims of Soviet and Nazi terror. Put another way, the Christian revelation unleashed a truth that is powerful enough to help us see persecution after the fact, but not powerful enough to make us see our projection during the violent, frenzied, spirited state of persecution itself.

**0:16:39.9 DP:** I want to hop in and clarify for our listeners who think that Christianity no longer dominates the world that you don’t need to be Christian to have a life that’s fully shaped by Christian values. Atheist or Christian, religious or secular, if you live in the West, your life has been shaped by Christian ideas through and through because of how influential they’ve become. And if these Christian ideas seem so trivial, it is only because they’re so influential. So we don’t explicitly need to be Christians to be suspicious of the scapegoat mechanism in the way that you’ve just described.

**0:17:18.7 JB:** That’s precisely right. Girard would say that the Christian moral paradigm we’re all in, even when it does not manifest explicitly as Christian, seeps into our everyday secular notions, such as the ideal of equality or human rights. And so the scapegoat mechanism really has been purged from all Western societies or exposed to all Western societies and not just explicitly Christian people in those societies.

To summarize then, the Christian revelation has stripped us naked of all of our old tools to bring peace. Not only is mimetic contagion more likely and worsened because of the closing down of physical and social difference, not only do we have to scapegoat larger and larger amounts of people for the same effect, but we’ve also lost our ability to create lasting peace through myth. We can have no more prohibitions grounded on the words of a God, and we certainly cannot perform cathartic rituals as wholeheartedly. Both the breaks on and solutions for violence of old have crumbled.

So that begs the question, why haven’t we gone bust yet? Girard’s answer is that we’ve developed new institutions, not identical to the ritualistic and prohibitory institutions of pagan society, but not completely different either. To repeat… There are three key institutions that channel, contain, and direct violence in modernity – law, capitalism and global trade, and war. Let’s examine each of them in succession to see how they deal with violence.