**1:15:49.5 JB:** So how has innovation become perverted in modernity? The perversion takes on the form of hypocrisy. It’s the same story over again. It’s the fetishization of innovation, of the new, of change, of originality, that proves itself to be the most derivative conformity, disguised as rupture – and Girard encapsulates all of that under the word “fashion”.

While Girard means for fashion to encompass a much broader set of phenomena, we can tease out the form of this perversion by looking at fashion in the colloquial sense, our clothing. Fashion, at least to my understanding, a great deal of popular fashion, observes this logic. It derives its value from being original, from not being owned by others. It’s a form of distancing. That distancing is conformist because it is determined by the other. This is the lesson we had learned in negative mimesis. Let me give you a funny example. I actually had a very good friend who wore two shoes, each with completely different colors, for the sake that no one else wore shoes this way. In some sense, this negative fashion is more arbitrary than pure conformity, as this example shows, because traditions such as wearing the same colored shoes usually exist for good reasons. And I think fashion is also conformist because many times, the way we try to distance is exactly the same as others: think about the example we talked about in American Psycho and the business card scene, where all the bankers wanted to differentiate themselves, but they did so in the same way, printing and getting very, very similar business cards. And I don’t think this intuition is too far off from the logic of popular fashion. A new trend is arbitrarily set off by some influencers to differentiate themselves from the crowd. Everyone in the crowd slowly starts to converge onto the trend because they too want to be different. And that trend slowly starts to lose its value and the whole cycle needs to start overall again.

Fashion, then, is a desire for innovation for its own sake and a strong distaste for imitation and it has permeated society – more than ever, we want to be individuals, we want to be original, but Girard warns us this way. I quote: “You can’t subvert tradition except from within. Once you are exterior to everything, you’re in the void and you’re there to stay. That’s where I think we are today. The more we condemn imitation, the more we surrender to it under various guises. Fashion has never been more powerful than it is today.” We don’t want to spend years anymore studying classical physics. We don’t want to spend our youth imitating the traditional poetic forms. We no longer want to be mere interpreters of other philosophers and we feel ashamed when we imitate other people’s business models. The problem is that meaningful innovation is dependent on imitation and as a result, what we get are grotesque displays of originality that are arbitrary and in fact, very derivative.

Girard has this to say again: “The modern world rejects imitation in favor of originality at all costs. You should never say what others are saying, never paint what others are painting, never think what others are thinking, and so on. Since this is absolutely impossible, there soon emerges a negative imitation that sterilizes everything… More and more often they’re obliged to turn their coats inside out (perhaps not unlike my friend wearing two colored shoes) and with great fanfare, announce some new”epistemological rupture” that is supposed to revolutionize the field from top to bottom. This rage for originality has produced a few rare masterpieces and quite a few rather bizarre things… Just a few years ago the mimetic escalation had become so insane that it drove everyone to make himself more incomprehensible than his peers… The principle of originality at all costs leads to paralysis. The more we celebrate “creative and enriching” innovations, the fewer of them there are… For two thousand years the arts have been imitative, and it’s only in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries that people started refusing to be mimetic. Why? Because we’re more mimetic than ever. Rivalry plays a role such that we strive vainly to exorcize imitation.”

**1:20:12.1 DP:** The thing that resonates with me about this quote is the section about the arts. I find that modern art is aimless and nihilistic and this quote gives me a window into why I feel that way. Modern art just tries too hard to be original and I compare that to the pre-modern era at a time when artists were pursuing beauty and trying to capture the world to try to be accurate instead of trying to be original. And now, I think modern art has devolved because it tries so hard to be original and quality, quality is no longer the primary pursuit.

**1:20:55.6 JB:** I think that’s right, but the problem with fashion isn’t just that no meaningful innovations can ever be produced, in the case of art, that there’s no more quality and it’s been traded for originality anymore, in your words – but that fashion can even turn us off from innovation itself.

For example, I think the public is growing sour on the technology sector, partly because of how much it exaggerates its own originality. The most trivial and derivative of companies are painted in the light of radical innovations and ruptures. I mean, go build Uber for dogs and go build Facebook for nannies – they might be great and meaningful businesses, but don’t disguise them as radical innovations. I find that it is this type of hypocrisy that makes innovation somewhat of a laughingstock and delegitimizes it as a cultural value altogether.

What hypocrisy is to love, what dogma is to truth, fashion is to innovation. The perennial problem of all forms of hypocrisy is that it delegitimizes the position which it claims to champion.