- What is Satan?
    
    Girard has this to say: **“Satan is the name for the mimetic process seen as a whole. That is why he is the source not merely of rivalry and disorder, but of all the forms of lying order inside which humanity lives. Human beings are sons of Satan because they are sons of this murder.”**  
    Satan is the scapegoat mechanism.  
    He is the frenzy that leads groups to descend into chaos, but also the violence and lies that establishes the worldly order.  
    But isn’t the scapegoat mechanism responsible for all culture and society? And then does that make all human society satanic?  
    It does. Or at least you are almost right. Satan isn’t all of society, but all of worldly power. Satan is the prince and principalities of the world. **He strives to be like God. He wants to be the ruler for this world, just as God is for the next.**  
    This is Girard’s conclusion: it’s very surprising, so I’m not surprised at all, that you jumped in and asked that question.  
    This idea that worldly power is inherently satanic is not a foreign one to Christian theology, and its implications are profound. The false pagan gods that the scapegoat mechanism establishes, those are all satanic – the false idols that take us away from the one true God. All of our institutions, like law, in so far as they are grounded on violence and lies, those are also manifestations of Satan. But it’s not just violence that is satanic, so is worldly order and peace that comes from this violence. It is satanic because it is built upon the body of a murdered victim. **In that way, by living in and benefiting from that peace, Girard thinks we are all, you and I, participating in satanism right now.****While the entire worldly order we live in is all tainted by Satan to some degree, there are particular strands of ideas that are strongly and more explicitly satanic. And for Girard, right-wing reactionary political ideologies – such as Nazism – that outwardly reject the Christian concern for the victim, that want to go back to scapegoating and killing, these for Girard are all strongly satanic.**  
    •
    

- Girard’s Interpretation of the Christian Revelation: un conditional Love
    
    Let’s think about another concept. What does the Christian revelation translate to in anthropological language? Well, that’s what we’ve spent this entire lecture dissecting: the Christian revelation is the exposure and defeat of the scapegoat mechanism – which is also Satan.  
    Christ expels and wounds Satan. **And Christ just has one thing to prescribe – it’s not the Eucharist, it’s not the Lord’s Prayer, it’s not Lent, it’s not virginity – in this view, even the belief in God the Father is not the constitutive message of Christ – all Christ asks us to do is love.**  
    Unwavering, unconditional love for everyone as Christ exemplified, is the only thing that can save us when we are deep in the mimetic process, when we are in the grips of Satan.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Interpretation of the Anti-Christ: progressive’s totalitarians
    
    **0:45:47.1 JB:** Let’s continue painting the picture. Let’s continue building the dictionary. What about the Anti-Christ? How does that translate into anthropological language? Well, first, let’s begin on the theological side. The Anti-Christ is a devious figure only briefly mentioned in the New Testament. The Anti-Christ isn’t Satan, who directly opposes Christ, but operates in a more subtle manner by competing with and subverting Christ – the Anti-Christ will work wonders, he’ll sit in the temple of God and claim to be God himself.  
    This is what Girard has to say: “**The attempt by Nietzsche and Hitler to make humankind forget the concern for victims has ended in a failure that seems definitive, at least for the moment. But it is not Christianity that profits from the victory of the concern for victims in our world. It is rather what I think must be called the other totalitarianism, the most cunning and malicious of the two, the one with the greatest future, by all evidence. At present it does not oppose Judeo-Christian aspirations but claims them as its own and questions the concern for victims on the part of Christians ..**.  
    •
    

- Left wing woke
    
    The other totalitarianism does not openly oppose Christianity but outflanks it on the left wing. All through the twentieth century, the most powerful mimetic force was never Nazism and related ideologies. **The most powerful anti-Christian movement is the one that takes over and “radicalizes” the concern for victims in order to paganize it.** This other totalitarianism presents itself as the liberator of humanity. In trying to usurp the place of Christ, the powers imitate him in the way a mimetic rival imitates his model in order to defeat him. They denounce the Christian concern for victims as hypocritical and a pale imitation of the authentic crusade against oppression and persecution for which they would carry the banner themselves.”  
    If Satan is reactionary totalitarianism, then the Anti-Christ is progressive totalitarianism. Why? For Girard, the core message of the Christian revelation is that the victim is innocent and ought to be protected. Far-right reactionary movements directly oppose this message. They want to bring back power. They shamelessly persecute victims – Satan stands directly opposed to Christ. Far-left progressive movements, however, appropriate this message.  
    For Girard, they pay lip service to the protection of victims in order to continue persecuting. Today, the only type of persecution that is accepted is persecution in the name of protecting victims. Think about all the horrors committed in the Soviet Union in the name of protecting the proletariat, the little guy. This is what it means to paganize Christianity and why progressive movements, in so far as they’re hypocritical, of course, constitute for Girard the Anti-Christ. The false prophet who appears so close to Christ but so easily leads us astray.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Interpretation of the Kingdom of God: the end of violence
    
    Let’s move on to a slightly more optimistic Christian notion. What about the kingdom of God? How does Girard interpret that? I quote you, Girard: “**The significance of the Kingdom of God is completely clear. It is always a matter of bringing together the warring brothers, of putting an end to the mimetic crisis by a universal renunciation of violence…The Kingdom of God means the complete and definitive elimination of every form of vengeance and every form of reprisal in relations between men.”**  
    The kingdom of God is not necessarily only available in some other-worldly beyond, but establish able in this world. It is made possible by Jesus exposing the scapegoat mechanism and giving us the prescription for unconditional love. The kingdom of God is when all of us practice unconditional love and renounce violence – and I do mean all of us, because if only some people ascribe to nonviolence, they will become victims and expelled as Jesus was.  
    • Girard’s Interpretation of the Apocalypse  
    However, if we don’t live up to this ideal of the Kingdom of God, then Girard thinks we’re heading towards Apocalypse. The Christian idea of Apocalypse, as captured by New Testament books such as Revelations, tells us of a violent ending of the world. Girard humanizes this ending. Violence will not be caused by God, but by us. It will be human violence, our inability to follow Jesus’ prescriptions of unconditional love that will be the end of us. Now that we no longer have the scapegoat mechanism – an easy out from violence – to lean on, we are susceptible to a world-scaled mimetic contagion engulfing our entire species in violence. There’s nothing other-worldly about this ending, nothing “religious” in the traditional sense of the word religion – as the cover of Girard’s most apocalyptic book, he had the picture of a nuclear explosion. Clearly, Apocalypse comes from the hands of man. This is the anthropological reading.  
    •
    

- A Christian Dictionary
    
    **We’ve compiled a dictionary here, translating core Christian concepts – original sin, evil, Satan, Christian revelation, Anti-Christ, Kingdom of God, and Apocalypse – into anthropological terms. And we can now use this dictionary to translate the essential Christian story into an easily digestible history of mankind.****The Christian story, let me give you that one first, goes something like this: imitating Satan, we developed original sin, which is responsible for all worldly evil. This original sin led us to worship Satan in the guise of false idols. Christ exposed Satan and gave us the possibility of freedom. Satan and the Anti-Christ tempt us to this day. And finally, the Christian Revelation engenders either the Kingdom of God or violent Apocalypse. It’s a five-fold story. And so let’s now translate this story one sentence at a time for you to see the power of this Girardian dictionary that we’ve built.**  
    The first sentence  
    is, **“Imitating Satan we developed original sin, which is responsible for worldly evil.”** This becomes: the fundamental human drive is metaphysical desire – the desire to exist in great measure – and it is responsible for all the psychological and social pathologies in this world.  
    The second sentence,  
    “This original sin led us to worship Satan in the guise of false idols,” becomes: metaphysical desire leads groups towards reciprocal violence – the only solution to which is the scapegoat mechanism that violently and deceitfully expels innocent victims and erects arbitrary gods. Do you see the power of this dictionary?  
    The third sentence  
    then is this, “Christ exposed Satan and gave us the possibility of freedom.” It becomes: the story of the crucifixion shed light on the violence and lies of the scapegoat mechanism and gave us agency to build better societal structures.  
    The fourth sentence,  
    “Satan and the Anti-Christ tempt us to this day” becomes: in modernity, far-right movements openly persecute victims, whereas far-left movements persecute victims in the name of ending persecution.  
    And finally, the final and fifth sentence,  
    the ending to this Christian story is this. Let me repeat it one more time, “The Christian Revelation engenders either the Kingdom of God or violent Apocalypse.” Translated, it becomes: with the scapegoat mechanism now exposed and weakened, we are at a time in history where we can recognize each other’s humanity and unilaterally renounce violence. However, if we fail to do so, the checks on violence are gone and we will perish in one last world war.  
    What an achievement this is – to be able to render intelligible the core Christian message, the core Christian story and worldview without any appeal to metaphysical concepts or otherworldly ideals, but just human psychology and anthropological theories.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Unorthodoxy: The Sacrificial Reading
    
    However, it is because and not despite this massive achievement, Girard’s ability to translate the Christian message into anthropological language, that at the same time, Girard presents us with a deeply unorthodox Christianity.  
    It is unorthodox, first, because it must reject a canonical reading of the Christ story that tells of the Father sacrificing his one and only son to redeem humanity. Girard’s reading of Christianity forces him to push back on both fronts. The father did not sacrifice his son, and Christ’s death did not redeem humanity. Why? Well, if the father sacrificed the son – in the same way a tribal leader sacrifices a lamb to end a dispute – then God would be like a pagan god, demanding blood for blood. He would be no different than Aztec gods. He would be no different than Apollo. Such a reading, that the Father sent Christ to die and made the mob turn on him so that his blood would redeem our sins, paints a picture of a God keeping a vengeful moral tally that Girard just cannot have.  
    And such a story would be missing the entire point of Christ’s death, because instead of putting the agency in the mob and realizing the universal human folly of scapegoating, you would be putting the agency of Christ’s death onto God. Suddenly then, the crucifixion isn’t about a core mechanism within human nature with the universal relevance, instead it just becomes a particular event orchestrated by God. And the lessons learned in it, under this sacrificial reading, are not applicable everywhere, because this is a special show that God has put on for us. Girard has this to say, I quote: “To interpret it as sacrifice absolves man the responsibility of murder. It sugarcoats the crucifixion as the result of a divine pact rather than the misguided deeds of man which we must introspect and correct.”  
    And so, if God is sacrificial, it’s not the sacrifice of other for self that we are used to thinking about in religious sacrifice – it’s not putting a lamb in place of our sins and killing it – it’s a sacrifice of self for other that Christ and God is doing – like a fireman rushing into a building knowing that he will likely perish.  
    And of course, for Girard, Christ’s death did not redeem our sins, it exposed our sins. This exposure gives us the possibility of redemption indeed, but it’s not redemption itself.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Unorthodoxy: God’s Absence
    
    Girard’s Christianity then is unorthodox, second, because of his conception of divinity. Go onto the street and ask any Christian why Christ is divine, why he’s the one true God. What do you think they’re going to say?**0:57:00.7 DP:** They’re probably gonna talk about the miracles, turning water to wine, raising from the dead, walking on water, and then being resurrected.**0:57:08.2 JB:** Precisely. They would say the miracles and the fact that Jesus came back to life. But Girard says, nay. That can’t be why Christ is divine. Because pagan gods are resurrected all the time, pagan gods perform a whole boatload of miracles as well. Do you take Christ to be a conjurer of cheap tricks? For Girard, Christ’s divinity is not in his power and otherworldliness, but in his morality and humanism.  
    In defending Christ as the true God, Girard doesn’t even bring up the miracles. And when he does bring up the resurrection, what’s important for him is less so that Christ was resurrected – pagan gods get resurrected all the time – but that there were three days between death and resurrection. For Girard, this symbolized that the link between mob violence and life, between violent expulsion and worldly peace, had been fundamentally broken. In fact, what is more a convincing sign of Christ’s divinity is his refusal to perform miracles on the cross to save himself and his experience of human suffering, epitomized by his desperate cry on the cross, Matthew 27:46: “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”  
    In all of Girard’s books, there’s just one sentence where Girard says something substantive about the other world, about the beyond. Upon losing hope that we can establish the Kingdom of God on earth, Girard says this: “Christ’s triumph will take place in a beyond of which we can describe neither the time nor place.” The only time, at least that I can find, where anything of import happens not on humanistic terms is this one single sentence that Christ will establish his kingdom not in this world but the next. In about 20 or so books, that is all that he has to say about the beyond, and I imagine many Christians will find it lacking. How are our sins punished? How will God judge our souls? How does purgatory work? What is the ontology of the next world? These aren’t even the questions Girard bothers to answer.  
    If I may be as heretical to Girard as I think he is to Christian orthodoxy, I would say that Girard is giving us a very atheistic Christianity. Where even God himself doesn’t play a big part. Listen to this. This is Girard. I’m gonna quote him: **“So now we are liberated. We know that we are by ourselves, with no father in the sky to punish us and interfere with our paltry business. Divine punishment is demystified by the Gospels. Its only place nowadays is in the mythic imagination.”**  
    This shouldn’t be interpreted literally and taken out of context – he isn’t saying by that phrase, no father in the sky, that there is no God, but that there is no punishing God, no father in the sky to punish us, who gets involved in human affairs. But I think you get the intuition here. Girard has done such a good job explaining Christianity by appealing to humanistic mechanisms that there leaves little room for God or beyond. Far are we from the meditations on Christian ontology that we find in Augustine. Far are we from the theological reachings for the Trinity that we find in Aquinas. Far are we from the detailed descriptions of the afterlife we find in Dante. And far are we from the angelic civil war we find in Milton. In Girard’s Christianity, God’s absence is just as loud and jarring as humanity’s presence. The success of his anthropology of the Cross crowds out a theology of the Cross.  
    •
    

- The new Moral Paradigm: Should be good and Evil, not Power full and powerless
    
    This is Girard’s position. I quote: **“Instead of making the crucifixion a cause of Jesus’ divinity, it is preferable to see it as a consequence of Christ’s divinity**.” Girard’s point here is that if Christ were a pagan god, if he were a false god, then his death and the peace that ensued would be the cause for his divinity. But Christ is the one true God, one who is moral through and through, perfected in his innocence, truth, and love, and such a being was bound to be sought out and killed by our violent and unjust world. The crucifixion is the consequence of his divinity, not the cause.  
    And so, not only does Jesus dismantle the scapegoat mechanism, but he also supplants the pagan sacred with Christian divinity. **The genuine sacred for Girard is not power, powerful and powerless, but morality, good and evil.** The genuine sacred is not pagan transcendence – being more than man, having these miraculous powers – but humanism – perfecting the qualities of man, of truth, of love, of innocence. Clearly, there has been a revaluation of values. From now on, our dominant moral paradigm will not be between powerful and powerless, but be between good and evil.  
    •
    

- Worldly Peace comes from eliminating Evil not the Powerful
    
    So what is so unorthodox about this? Well, the problem, I wager, is that Girard did too good of a job translating Christian phenomenon into psychological, cultural, and social constructs – and in doing so, he de-emphasizes, I think, what most Christians probably consider a crucial part of Christianity: the otherworldliness, the metaphysical, theological, cosmological beyond. Let me give you a few examples. Apocalypse comes from human hands. Satan is just the emergent sum of the victim age mechanism. What defines Christ is that he perfected human virtues of truth, love, and innocence. The next eternal life is barely brought up. Christ has not come down to teach us how to save our souls for eternity, but how to be freed of violence in this world. Christ’s message has been transformed from otherworldly salvation to this worldly peace.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Unorthodoxy: Historical Christianity
    
    But the question arises, if Christianity is so humanistic and this worldly, if it’s really against religion and sacredity, how has it become a religion in itself? How have we founded societies with it as its basis? Girard’s provocative answer is this, I quote: **“The Gospels can serve as a foundation for a new culture similar to all the previous cultures, only as a result of a certain distortion of the original message.”**  
    The third way then, that Girard’s Christianity is unorthodox, is that in so far as Christianity has taken on a religious form, and in so far as it has been at the seat of a worldly power, it has been perverted. And that’s almost all of historical Christianity. For Girard, the very idea of Christian power is an oxymoron because the core message of Christianity is the injustice of all worldly power and religion. So it’s not just the clear perversions of historical Christianity that worry Girard, it’s not just the selling of indulgences or the orgies in the Vatican or the justifications of conquest, the very fact that Christianity has taken on a religious form as a cultural foundation is a perversion in itself. People have deified and dehumanized Christ in the same way they did Zeus. Like the sacrificial reading, the Christian story has been distorted to be more palatable. Christianity has been the basis of persecution, the Jews, witches, Muslims, and there’s a whole host of prohibitions and a whole host of rituals, just as pagan religion had.Girard’s point is clear: people have missed the core Christian message – love thy neighbor, renounce violence, that is the core of Christ’s teaching, which has been muffled by a religious form. Think about how radical this is – what it means to be Christian and to be like Christ. It’s not the Eucharist, it’s not the Lord’s prayer, it’s not Lent, it’s not chastity, it’s not biblical study, it’s not even, dare I say, the belief in the resurrection or faith in the Father. While all of these may help or are necessary supports, the constitutive quality of being Christian for Girard is aspiring to unconditional love and the renunciation of all violence unconditionally.  
    •
    

- Girard’s Unorthodoxy: Apocalyptic Ambivalence
    
      
    This incompatibility between worldly power and Christianity is so strong that there is one final Girardian unorthodoxy that flows from it. Every capital-G Good thing we have talked about today, the expulsion of the scapegoat mechanism, the exposure of violence and deceit, the introduction of truth and love in history, all of these will tear our worldly foundations apart and lead us to Apocalypse. And how can it not tear the world apart -- if human societies, as we discussed last lecture, depend on violence and deceit for worldly peace, then the introduction of love and truth can only bring about chaos. If Satan is ultimately evil but brings worldly peace, then Christ is ultimately good but brings worldly catastrophe. After all, Girard reminds us, Christ himself tells us as much. Matthew 10:34, Christ says: "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword."  
      
    In the final two lectures then, we will understand the terrible wound that Christ's sword has left on human history`.`