**0:24:49.8 JB:** Hypocrisy goes a step beyond mere theater. Whereas theater sees you performing the actions of love without being motivated by love, hypocrisy sees you acting against love in the name of love. Hypocrisy actively persecutes its own victims in the name of protecting victims. The idea is this: The Christian revelation has exposed our evil tendencies towards persecution and as a result, our culture is one that sides with the victim and against persecution. But our stubborn human nature remains the same, and we still need to persecute. However, it’s no longer fashionable, as was the case in, say, the day of Achilles, to openly share our desire for conquest, vengeance, and hatred. We can only pursue these desires discreetly, secretly, by disguising them in pro-social motives. In our culture, the only acceptable reason we can have for persecution is to stop persecution. The wolf must now don sheepskin.

Think back to the personal example I gave of my college acquaintance, who was an economic progressive. The story went something like this: he was very passionate about distributive justice, and every time I would meet him, he would go on and on about how much more we could be doing for the least fortunate and initially I thought well what a loving, compassionate, caring guy. However, as I got to know him better, I realized that he was a really resentful and spiteful person. I had a hard time squaring his seemingly religious concern for the poor with his own lack of concern and care as a person. But it all made sense when he confessed to me that what was motivating his progressivism wasn’t a universal benevolent concern for the poor, but a localized resentment of the rich. You see, my acquaintance came from a middle-class family, but grew up with upper-middle-class peers and was always made to feel poor. His orientation of values against wealth was not for itself, but to get back at his peers. By painting money-making as immoral, he found himself on the moral high ground. He wasn’t concerned with economic victims that much at all, but in the culture we are in, the best way for him to attack his richer peers was to accuse them of victimization and economic exploitation. I think this quote from Girard captures the essence of the story that I’ve been trying to tell quite well: “The victims most interesting to us are always those who allow us to condemn our neighbors. And our neighbors do the same. They always think first about victims for whom they hold us responsible.”

On this front, Girard isn’t convinced society has really changed that much at all – that we’ve really given up persecution. Rather, it’s more a superficial switch of who we think it’s acceptable to persecute. The canonical victims are completely off limits: the ethnic minorities, the lower classes, the disabled – and Girard thinks that’s a great thing. But we’ve simply flipped it on its head. Now we feel warranted, perhaps even compelled, to persecute all types of privilege. Whether it’s white privilege, ableist privilege, whether it’s class privilege or men’s privilege. Girard has this to say: “Our society’s obligatory compassion authorizes new forms of cruelty.”

And this cruelty is the first problem of hypocrisy. That it does exactly what it explicitly vows not to do – persecution. Now lest we trivialize the dangers here by just giving an example of a harmless economic progressive, Girard reminds us of the terrible atrocities committed in the name of protecting victims. I quote: “Hypocrisy is dangerous then because it leads to what it claims to prevent: the persecution of victims. Anyone familiar with the tragedies of the Soviet Union grounded on protection of the victimized proletariat should look at America’s caught up in victimhood ideology with trembling fear. This ‘other totalitarianism’, this inquisition in the name of victims is the form that arbitrary unjustified violence takes place today: the persecution of persecutors.”

But there is an even more dangerous problem with hypocrisy, beyond doing explicitly what it vows not to do. And that’s this: Hypocrisy delegitimizes love from the inside, and legitimizes, engenders the opposite: violence. Recall, in Girardian psychology, we hold intellectual positions, political positions, less for the positions themselves, but because of our relationships with the people who hold those positions. Reductively: if we feel an affinity towards them, then we are nudged to adopt their position and if we feel disgusted or disdain towards them, then we are nudged away from their position. The problem is that people naturally feel repelled by hypocrites – so if most of the people who are espousing love are hypocrites, then love and concern for the victim itself would start losing its cultural prestige. Even though we may try to use our faculties of reason, it is very hard for people not to feel repulsed by the hypocrisy by those like my college acquaintances and pushed to the opposite side of the spectrum.

Again, lest I trivialize what is at stake here, let’s briefly turn to Hannah Arendt’s Origins of Totalitarianism to see how hypocrisy engendered the Nazis. One of the key questions that Arendt wants to answer in this book is how Germany and most curiously of all, how the German intellectual elite, could have so readily welcomed Nazism after espousing humanistic, compassionate, loving values for centuries. Arendt’s explanation begins with the bourgeois of Germany, the capitalist elite of the time. Not unlike the woke capital of today, Arendt reasons that a double morality emerged within the bourgeois German elite of the early 20th century: there was a private morality of acquisition that stood in stark contradiction with the publicly paraded humanitarian values of compassion, concern for the weak, tolerance that they paraded. In short, the bourgeois were hypocrites.

And it was none other than this hypocrisy that first, made the values they espoused so hollow. It delegitimized love and compassion and pushed people towards the openly violent values of the Nazis. Second, it was the bourgeois lack of consistency that made the Nazis’ consistency seem refreshing. If the bourgeois claimed they were saints and acted as gangsters, at least the Nazis acted like gangsters and claimed they were gangsters. That’s why they were refreshing to the people of the Weimar Republic. In short, it is not a pull towards the value of the Nazis that made the intellectual elite give their support, but a push away from hypocrisy. The Nazis were simply the opposite of what the woke capital, the bourgeois, were. And that’s why people rallied to them. I will share with you Arendt’s own words here. I quote: “Since the bourgeoisie claimed to be the guardian of Western traditions and confounded all moral issues by parading publicly virtues which it not only did not possess in private and business life, but actually held in contempt, it seemed revolutionary to admit cruelty, disregard of human values… those who traditionally hated the bourgeoisie and had voluntarily left respectable society saw [in the Nazis] only the lack of hypocrisy and respectability, not the content of Nazism itself.”

**0:33:03.1 DP:** That’s a terrifying thought.

**0:33:04.5 JB:** It is a terrifying thought. And I think it has very practical contemporary relevance to the disastrous consequences of the woke capital and progressive hypocrisy today.

To summarize, even within this one force of love that Christianity has let loose in modernity, we see three different strands that range from the divine to the worldly to the apocalyptic. Genuine Christian love helps others indiscriminately for the sake of others. It is a force as strong as ever that we can genuinely be proud of. Theatrical love performs the actions of love for the sake of one’s vanity. Although conformist, it is still somewhat laudable. Hypocritical love acts against love in the name of love. Girard sees this form of hypocrisy rampant in our victim-obsessed society and is capable of delegitimizing love altogether as a cultural value and engendering its opposite – a reactionary killing of victims – as it had in the Weimar Republic.