- The Prosecutors case: the crowds case
    
    Sophocles’ Theban Trilogy is one in a long line of myths that try to capture the story of Oedipus. Girard’s claim is that this story, or, at the very least, stories like these point to some real events that happened. He might not have been named Oedipus. The city might not have been Thebes. And certainly, he did not have the power to cause plagues and end plagues. Pagan myths are always told from the perspective of the persecutor, the perspective of the crowd, and this is always deceitful.  
    However, the Oedipus myth might have been pointed to some real event, where patricide and incest was the cause of the problem and exile was its solution. It was probably an event that was so tumultuous for all those who experienced it that it grounded the moral universe of people in that society. And even in Sophocles’ time, if it couldn’t establish an entire moral universe on its own, the Oedipus myth could certainly lend prestige to a few institutions of the day.  
    ◦ \
    

- Exagurate reality ti a point oif mythology
    
    But Girard’s point is that most religious myths weren’t mere fiction. His view of religion is one of psychologization, that we project sacredity onto a real event, and I think I find that somewhat plausible. I mean, think back to the religions we do have historical records of. Even the staunchest atheists must admit that they were pointing at real events and real people. There was a Jesus of Nazareth, whether he was the one true God, that’s up to debate, but there’s no debate whether he really existed. In like manner, there was a historical Siddhartha and there was a historical Mohammad. And we’ve just discovered that the Trojan War did in fact happen as well. We discovered this in the 20th century when we unearthed the site of Troy. Girard then simply asks us to extend the same intuitions to the myths of yore which we don’t have real historical records of, the Baldrs, the Zeus, the Purushas, and the Oedipuses of the world.  
    ◦
    

- Instutilisination to repeat the mistake
    
    What is just as real as the events that these myths are pointing to are the institutions that these myths spawn and legitimize. This is the fourth and final step of the scapegoat mechanism: institutionalization. The point of these institutions is to use the lessons we learned in a myth to stop future societal collapse. And there are largely two types of institutions.  
    ◦ 1
    

- Prohibitions: caste & classes
    
    The first type is prohibitions. Prohibitions are institutions that introduce difference amongst people. If the problem with contagion is that differences, social differences, ceases to exist, prohibitions and institutions that are prohibitory will seek to reinforce those differences, to make sure those differences stick.**They try to push people apart so that their mimetic natures do not make them converge upon a similar set of objects.**  
    And so what are some real examples of prohibitions grounded on religion? Well, there’s entire time periods in different cultures where society kind of just closes down and society tries to limit as much interaction with different people as possible. Lent is one example. The Sabbath is another example. And perhaps less familiar to our audience, the rites of the Swazi Incwala peoples**: throughout their period of observance, all sexual activity, including the most legitimate, is completely forbidden.**  
    Even sleeping late in the morning is regarded as a crime, and physical contact between individuals is to be avoided at all costs, even scratching oneself is heavily frowned upon. Of course, all singing, all loud noise, all types of play by children are prohibited. But furthermore, let me give you another set of examples.  
    In pagan societies, there’s often prohibitions against objects and people that call to mind the breaking down of differences, which lead to reciprocal violence. For example, twins amongst many different pagan societies had this very negative connotation, to the extent that often when twins are born, in some societies, the mother is asked to kill one of the twins. The reason that Girard thinks twins are often so prohibited against is because twins call to mind the breaking down of differences, the doubles that start to emerge in the height of mimetic contagion.  
    ◦ 2
    

- Rituals: catharsis by dwelling on the founding murder
    
    But that’s just one set of institutions that can be derived from religion. Girard sees another seemingly completely different set of institutions, and he calls them rituals.**Rituals act as a release valve if prohibitions lose power, if contagion threatens society again.** The logic of rituals is this, if society is somewhat relatively peaceful right now, let’s use prohibitions. Let’s make sure people don’t get riled up too much.**Let’s make sure that mimetic desire and metaphysical desire don’t pass too readily among people.**  
    But if society gets riled up to a point where prohibitions start breaking down, then we need to use a completely different strategy. **What we’re going to do is we’re going to simulate the initial founding murder in an act of catharsis and try to bring about the peace in a different way.**  
    Instead of trying to contain it, we’re going to simulate a release, simulate a catharsis. The examples of ritual in history are many as well.  
    There’s a whole set of festivities that are the exact opposite of time periods such as Lent and Sabbath, and that’s the festival. Think about the Bacchanal of Rome celebrating the cult of Dionysus, where all forms of indulgence, usually unaccepted in society, is. Or think about perhaps the heir to Bacchanal, which is today the contemporary Carnival. What we can see in modern examples of carnival is that it’s an imitation of the frenzy of the state of contagion.**There’s the excessive consumption, there’s the grotesque bodysuits emphasizing exaggerated body parts, there’s food fights, there’s the mocking of authorities, there’s abusive language and degrading acts. There’s a complete reversal of norms. In previous iterations of the carnival, the slaves actually have an opportunity to yell and berate the masters. It’s a complete 180 from the usual social prohibitions that prohibitions try to enact. And it’s a breaking down of difference in an attempt to simulate the state of mimetic contagion and the eventual cathartic release.****Girard provides a whole host of historical examples that I encourage you to explore, whether it’s the proliferation of animal sacrifice, whether it’s the Aztec human sacrifice, whether it’s Tupinambá ritualistic cannibalism, or the ritual incest for African kings.**  
    But we don’t need to look too far to understand what a ritual institution is. Tocqueville’s analysis of democratic elections conformed to this idea of a cathartic ritual, to have a controlled expulsion for people to vent their frustration. For Tocqueville, a key reason, I’m oversimplifying here of course, but a key reason that the democratic process is so stable isn’t because democracy chooses the wisest leaders all the time, or because democracy allows people to feel recognition, but that there’s a controlled expulsion of the leadership every eight, if not four years. The idea is that we get to, in a national ritual, project all our anger and frustration on the leaving administration, to have our friends and allies bolster our certainty of the evil of the leaving administration through unanimity. And it’s this psychological release valve that is so important for Tocqueville.  
    Of course, depending on the myth, different prohibitions and different rituals will be emphasized. But suddenly, with this idea in view, that the scapegoat mechanism eventually leads to both rituals and prohibitions, suddenly a whole host of moral events in a previously incomprehensible pagan universe now becomes readily intelligible.  
    ◦
    

- Oedipus
    
    Let’s go back to the story of Oedipus then, to understand how it influenced the Greek institutions of the day. The story of Oedipus, by the time of Sophocles, is probably too weak to establish an entire culture on its own, but its prestige could nonetheless reinforce certain prohibitions and rituals of its own.  
    The prohibitions are quite obvious and quite uninteresting. Kids don’t kill your dad and don’t have sex with your mom. That’s what got Thebes into this whole mess. And if you’re going to try doing that, you’re going to get yourself into a whole mess as well. The ritual that the Oedipus myth reinforces is the pharmakos. This is a real ritual that Greek city-states constantly practiced. In times of plague, Greek city-states would choose someone, a pharmakos, on the fringe of society, usually a beggar or criminal, that would inherit and be blamed for the plague or the chaos, and taken outside of the city walls to be humiliated, to be tortured and expelled for good. Perhaps not unlike us shooing away an administration then, the people in Greece felt cathartic release from this ritual. And it clearly worked in that regard, because it was a very popular and often practiced rite. Pharmakos is where the English word pharmacy takes root, but in Greek it meant both cure and poison. And not unlike Oedipus, the pharmakos had an ambivalent aura around him, ultimately evil because he had caused the plague, but ultimately good because he has the power to save people from it. So indeed, he was treated as an object of scorn, a butt of insults, but there’s always a quasi-religious aura of veneration around him. He also became, paradoxically perhaps to the modern intuition, a sort of cult-like object. And so do you see the proximity between pharmakos and Oedipus? How they’re all blamed for plagues, how they’re responsible for curing the plagues, and how they all have a dual era of being good and evil that unites in their power?  
    •
    

- The Violent Foundations of Society: max catharsis hence max violence
    
    **1:03:34.9 JB:** Girard’s unsettling conclusion is that not just human religions, but all human societies, along with their institutions, must be grounded on the myth of a founding murder.  
    To truly establish a peaceful society in a time of turmoil, this murder must be maximally cathartic and as a result, has to be maximally violent and deceitful – blaming a singular victim for the entirety of evil.  
    His surprising conclusion then is that worldly order, this worldly peace, human society, must be founded on violence and deceit. Cohesion is founded on finding a common enemy. As a contemporary example, or somewhat contemporary example, to see the cohesive force of having a joined enemy, we only ought look at World War II – because what could be a more unnatural pairing than capitalist America and communist Russia? Yet that was exactly what happened when both of them united against the Nazi threat. There’s this image of this cooperation that I always find very humorous. It’s a photo of American supply lines sent to the Soviet front and on it, quite lovingly, on the supplies that were sent over, was written: “Hammer and Sickle them.” Of course, the hammer and sickle stands for everything American capitalism is against, but even mortal enemies soon become friends when they are united by a greater enemy.  
    To make sense of Girard’s claim on the violent foundations of society, we must think back to Girard’s psychology, his elevation of spirit over reason: seeing us as symbolic social creatures instead of rational agents. For every social philosophy, we must ask who the subject is: for Marx’s philosophy, the subject is class. For fascism, it’s the nation state. For Augustine, it’s the Christian soul. For liberalism, it’s the rational agent. Girard’s subject is the spirited animal – not one who thinks in terms of utility and numbers, but vengeance and pride, honor and being, who experiences envy and resentment. For such a social creature, the primary social mechanisms that govern him, it’s not consensus, it’s not the mandate of heaven, it’s not the common good, it’s not rational political discourse… The most important tools at society’s disposal is prohibition, it’s social difference, it’s unanimity, it’s ritual, it’s catharsis, it’s prestige. These have nothing to do with truth, or more strongly, their proper functioning relies upon being grounded on a deceitful unanimity that can’t be exposed to the light of truth.  
    This is how total Girard’s claim is. Let me quote you so you don’t think I’m making this stuff up:  
    “**All religious rituals spring from the [founding] victim, and all the great institutions of mankind, both secular and religious, spring from ritual… they coincide with archetypal myths that tell, in apparently ‘naive’ fashion, how all man’s religious, familial, economic, and social institutions grew out of the body of an original victim.”**  
    •
    

- The Hymn of Purusha
    
    **1:06:39.0 JB:** To give Girard’s all-encompassing claim here just some semblance of plausibility, we must look beyond Oedipus to sacrificial myths that have grounded the entirety of a culture’s institution.  
    For that, we must turn to the Hymn of Purusha – a section in the Vedas, the founding text of Indian mythology and culture. This hymn tells about the founding murder of a divine being whose name is Purusha, and how this founding murder is responsible for the birth of Hindu society. I’ll let the hymn do the talking. It begins as such: **“The Man has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. He pervaded the earth on all sides and extended beyond it as far as ten fingers.”****These are the opening lines of the hymn to Purusha, and the first thing we are made aware of is not his morality, but his power,** the defining feature of the pagan sacred.  
    The hymn continues to describe how Purusha was sacrificed… Listen close. “From that sacrifice in which everything was offered, the melted fat was collected, and he made it into these beasts who live in the air, in the forest, and in villages. From that sacrifice… the verses and chants were born, the metres were born from it, and from it the liturgical formulas were born. Horses were born from it, and those other animals that have two rows of teeth; cows were born from it, and from it goats and sheep were born.”  
    What we’re hearing here is none other than the second and third step of the scapegoat mechanism, a murder, a sacrifice, and the following divinization of the peace and life that is brought about by the founding murder.  
    Do you see how what I just read you is a somewhat perhaps exaggerated form of the Oedipus myth? Where one man curing a city, that’s the logic of Oedipus, and it may seem extreme enough to us, but no, here, all the laws, all the animals, the entire living world, nay, life itself is attributed to this sacrifice.  
    But of course, for Girard’s theories to be true, it can’t just be one peace-giving event. Institutions must flow from it, and institutions do flow from it. Let me continue reading to you the hymn: **“His mouth became the Brahmin; his arms were made into the Warrior, his thighs the Artisan; and from his feet the Servants were born.”**  
    The most important prohibitions, the institution of the caste system, is justified on the founding murder of Purusha.  
    And this is how the hymn ends.”**The gods sacrificed the sacrifice by the sacrifice. Such were the first institutions. These powers had access to the firmament, where the Saints are, the original gods.”**  
    Not only are prohibitions justified on the Hymn of Purusha, but so are the most important ritual institutions, the institution of sacrifice, which were the domains of the Brahmin and the moral, religious, political pillar of Hindu society. Even this is legitimized on this founding murder that’s captured by this hymn.  
    The Hymn of Purusha, then, is one of these all-encompassing myths that does ground, nourish, and legitimize almost the entirety of the culture. The living animals, the plants, the laws, the music, the caste system, the sacrifices, all of these are attributed to the founding murder of Purusha.  
    •
    

- The Founding of Rome
    
    **1:10:20.0 JB:** But it’s not just Hindu culture. In many pagan cultures that we look, we should expect to find, buried deep within them, a founding murder institutionalized by myth that justifies and nourishes the most important institutions of a society. Let’s look at Rome, the Roman Republic, first. Think Romulus and Remus. How the death of Remus marks, in some way, the founding of the Roman Republic. Remus was killed because he transgressed the lines that Romulus had drawn around the city. Well, the lines that Remus transgressed then became the primarium – the sacred boundary of the city that took on a deep political and religious significance. This founding murder justified a deeply important Roman institution.  
    Let’s look at the Roman Empire. Julius Caesar is another canonical example of a victim turned God founding a pagan society. Roman society is in a state of chaos and civil war. This is the contagion. Julius Caesar is then scapegoated, blamed, and collectively murdered on the Senate floor. This is the founding murder, the scapegoating. Peace does not come immediately to Rome, but it does come at the hands of another Caesar, Caesar Augustus, Julius’ nephew. And with Augustus’ victory, Julius Caesar is literally deified by the Roman Senate and spawned so many myths that were canonized in Roman practices and also captured in Virgil, Ovid, Shakespeare, and the like. This, of course, is then the divinization as well as the institutionalization. Listen to what Shakespeare has to say about Caesar. I quote: “Your statue spouting blood in many pipes, in which so many smiling Romans bathed, signifies that from you great Rome shall suck reviving blood.” Caesar is the fountainhead. He’s the prestigious symbol, the fundamental bedrock that grounds the legitimacy of the Roman Imperium to which all rulers will have to pay homage to, often explicitly by bearing his name Caesar. And there are so many other cultures and religions and stories which Girard dissects deeply that we don’t have time to explore. I’ll simply point you to their direction, whether it’s the death of Baldr in Nordic mythology or the birth of Zeus in Greek mythology, whether it’s the Ojibwa myth of five gods expelling a sixth god from the group for taking off his eye patch and killing a human with his gaze among Native Americans, or whether it’s the Tikopia myth of a trickster god who was expelled for stealing food, popular among Pacific Islanders.  
    Everywhere we look in pagan society, we see their core institutions as grounded and legitimized by myths that can all be traced back to some founding murder.
    
    **0:51:26.7 JB:** We’ve covered three movements of the scapegoat mechanism already. **First, a society descending into chaos. Second, the society attributing blame onto a singular victim in a founding murder. Third, the divinization of the now murdered victim.**
    
    Girard believes that these are actually real events, that this is the real logic behind real historical events that have actually happened throughout history. These events are so impactful, so cataclysmic, that they spawned a series of myths around them that became the bedrock texts of religions. And given the close proximity between church and state in pagan society, it shaped the core practices and institutions of such societies as well.
    
    To summarize then, the scapegoat mechanism proceeds from a real cataclysmic event – where society experiences contagion, cathartic release, and divinizes new gods. This real event is dramatized and captured in myth and then translated back into real institutions in the form of prohibitions and rituals. This arc, going from real event to myth to real institutions, is not only how pagan gods and religions have been made, but also how all human societies and cultures are founded.