> What determines whether a mediation is internal (between two parties, bidirectionally) or external (between two parties, unidirectionally) depends on the distance between model and subject. In internal mediation, the pair is close enough that they end up desiring, competing, and converging on a similar set of objects. In external mediation, the pair is distant enough that even though one mediates the desires of the other, they never really converge onto the similar object because of how far apart they are.  
> When we talk about distance, there are two types of distances that matter here. The first type of distance is spatial temporal distance. And it’s quite trivial and easy to understand because it prevents the pair from competing by making sure the pair is not exposed. If I’m being mediated by Michael Jordan, that is because I am exposed to him through advertisements and commercials. Yet Jordan is not exposed to me in any way. We are far enough apart that he mediates me but I do not mediate him. **The arc of history has reduced this type of distance.** Before, it was hard to be physically exposed to more than those in your city – but now, both advances in transportation as well as in communication have rendered the entire world smaller, much more proximate. And therefore, the slogan of social media companies like Facebook “of connecting the world” is not a celebratory declaration for Girard, but a terrifying damnation for Girard because it renders us all the more capable of mediating and competing with each other.

[[External mediation]]

[[internal meditation-one up menship]]

- **Admire jordan and envy your nehibhour, while it should have been the other way around**
    
    **0:08:06.1 JB:** Precisely. And Girard would say, not only do communication technologies like social media reduce this distance but literal physical distance is reduced by means such as air travel. There’s a second type of distance that’s a bit more subtle and more interesting, and that’s social distance. Social distance prevents the pair, even if they’re exposed, from identifying with each other and believing that the same objects which satisfy one will also be fitting for the other. This social distance, this differentiation, if you will, prevents metaphysical desire from contagiously spreading from subject to subject. Class, for example, acts as such a mode of differentiation. In my own life, I find it quite curious and somewhat humorous that I’m probably much more jealous of the other 23-year-old entrepreneurs than I am of the multi-billionaires in my life. And prima facie, from an external perspective, that’s a ridiculous person to be jealous of because the billionaire has so much more than me, whereas the 23-year-old and I may be indistinguishable. But Girard’s point is that jealousy and envy are emotions that operate between similars. The objects the billionaire deserves aren’t the objects that I think I deserve because we are so different as to be in completely different classes. But the other 23-year-old, well, we are much more socially close and I much more easily and readily take on his desires as my own.
    

[[Contagious Desire]]

[[Inspirational desire]]