**0:34:54.3 JB:** Law, by atomizing us, decreases the actuality of violence by allowing us to freely interact with each other, however cold that interaction may be, but always the looming threat of state violence is in the background in those interactions. With law, then, now we can conceive of each other as equals, now we can desire what the president of the United States desires – this creates more conflict, which rarely results in actual violence because of law, but does lead to a greater buildup of violent energies. Law increases the potential buildup of violence while decreasing the actuality of day-to-day violence by allowing us to interact much more frequently – law increases internal mediation, but stops it before the stage of violence.

**0:35:46.7 DP:** There’s a popular critique of Steven Pinker who writes that never has the world been safer than it is right now. But the critique goes as such, and I think it’s a good point, where in the world of physics, there’s an idea of potential energy and there’s kinetic energy. And likewise, in the world of social relations, there’s potential violence and kinetic violence. And Pinker is only looking at kinetic violence, how much violence is actually happening in the world. But what you’re talking about here is the buildup of violence, the potential violence, and with nuclear weapons and the way that society is structured under this legalistic framework, it’s the potential violence that is being underestimated in his ideas.

**0:36:29.2 JB:** Precisely, and you bringing up Pinker, it makes me think of what I think colloquially people call the turkey problem – that a turkey who’s statistically inclined, that lives each day closer to Thanksgiving, will conclude that it is actually safer than the day before – because there is no kinetic violence, right? The turkey is safe, there’s an extra day that’s gone by without there being violence. But precisely to your point, the potential violence is building up. And paradoxically, the turkey will conclude that he is safest on Thanksgiving, which is of course is the most dangerous day of the year. So this delineation between potential and kinetic violence is important when we’re trying to understand the violent potential of modernity. The absence of violence is not the absence of the potential for violence.