**0:11:18.6 JB:** The metaphor then that I think best captures this radical break as well as stubborn continuity is the period when a rocket has launched but has not reached escape velocity. I think this analogy is apt first because such a rocket is clearly a radical break from when it was stationary but it is also a continuity because it is still governed by the logic of gravity and still within the gravitational pull. The same I think can be said for the point of history we are in now. There’s a clear radical break between our culture that protects victims and all the ones that have come before which made them into scapegoats. But the stubborn gravitational pull of the human condition remains the same. We still need to persecute and find victims to blame. This analogy of the rocket I think is apt second because such a rocket can either reach orbit and be freed once and for all or just be blown to smithereens. And for Girard, our future is just as binary, kingdom of God or violent apocalypse with no in between.

Christianity sets us free or perhaps just as aptly, exiles us from the comfort of circular time and sets us on a linear, accelerating path. The aim of these last two lectures then, is to describe the forces within and the direction of this linearity. By thwarting the scapegoat mechanism, Christianity unleashes four forces within history that slowly but surely take us to the modernity which we find ourselves today. As with all things Girard, these forces are deeply ambivalent. Within the Pandora’s box, we have the good – love, truth, innovation – and the bad – violence that are growing and have broken free all at the same time. What’s more, even within these forces Girard’s analysis is ambivalent. Love often manifests as hypocrisy, truth becomes dogma, innovation degenerates into fashion and even within violence Girard sees a key motivational force that has brought forth the most enviable living conditions of man when channeled through capitalism. Let us use the rest of this lecture then to examine and reflect on the three good forces of modernity, beginning with love.