Mimesis can be best understood under the light of David Hume. In his _A Treatise on Human Nature_, Hume develops a concept that becomes foundational to Scottish moral philosophy: sympathy. Sympathy is the human capacity to understand others by co-experiencing their emotions in one’s own mind. In order to emphasize just how foundational and inevitable Hume took this capacity to be, Hume employs the very famous metaphor of two violin strings setting each other in motion. When you put two violin strings together, as you flick one, a similar frequency of vibration will translate into the other. This is how Hume describes it. I quote: “As in strings equally wound up, the motion of one communicates itself to the rest; so all the affections readily pass from one person to another and beget correspondent movements in every human creature.”

What is relevant in this analogy for Girard, is the observation that there’s a species of human behavior – and for the lack of a better term, I apologize, I use “behavior” here to connote the broadest possible sense of behavior: whether it’s experiences, judgments, actions, intentions, values – there’s a species of human behavior that proceed from copying an external instance of said behavior. Indeed, this logic that Hume identifies in sympathy – the carrying out of an external behavior – is none other than the logic of mimesis. What is different is that unlike sympathy, which only traffics in emotions, mimesis spans the entire gamut of human behavior.

I like this metaphor because, first, it describes humans as naturally social creatures prone to a form of co-vibration. Just as strings on a violin aren’t independent, neither are we. Mimesis is the fundamental capacity to gain access to the subjectivity of others as well as to reproduce objective cultural forms – so in other words, mimesis constitutes us as social beings.

Second, I like this analogy because it clearly paints mimesis as a tendency. Just as strings next to each other are inclined to co-vibrate, so are we in ingesting our cultural environment.

The third reason that I like this analogy, then, is because mimesis here is also clearly painted as a capacity, not a deterministic faculty that we are obliged to always follow. This metaphor leaves room for agency because the violinist can always, when plucking the first string, pluck the second string differently, or hold the second string steady so that it does not co-vibrate. In the same manner, mimesis itself does not rob us of our agency, and we have some degree of freedom to choose who and what to imitate, whom to extend sympathy to.

- Evidence is there for mimesis?
    
    That’s a really good question. And I think like most answers to the question, what evidence is there in this part of Girard’s argument, the first response is always an interpretive one. Girard always presents to us an interpretive or hermeneutical proof. That’s to say, he’s saying something like, “Just grant me this one hypothesis, just humor me for now, just go on this path that I’m taking you down and let me show you the broad kaleidoscope of phenomenon that this concept alone can make sense of.” The convincingness of mimesis is not grounded on some empirical fact, but a broad range of phenomenon that it alone illuminates. That’s not to say there is no empirical evidence whatsoever to back up Girard’s claims. Think to the American psychologist, I believe his name is Andrew Meltzoff, who observed that infants as young as 40 minutes would naturally mimic the experimenter’s facial expressions with surprising accuracy. Of course, it was the first time that one of these babies saw someone make a silly face or stick their tongue out, but the inclination to imitate was intuitive and innate. Perhaps another set of empirical evidence, if you have a taste for things like that, that you can look at, are mirror neurons. These are neurons that fire both when you observe an action, as well as when you perform that similar action. So this lends to the idea that there’s some real biological basis to the idea that doing and observing the same behavior are somehow intimately connected.
    

Mimesis

Humans are different from animals by mimesis and mimesis alone

- Humans are different from animals by mimesis and mimesis alone
    
    Humanity is un recognizable without mimesis  
    For Girard, mimesis isn’t everything but everything, to some degree, is mimetic. The rush of adrenaline that infects you in a roaring and lively sporting stadium. The tribalism of politics. The madness of cults and how they sustain each other’s delusions. The passing on of accents. Even as “animal” as an activity of replenishing ourselves, drinking water, we may still call to mind, however subtly, how our favorite athlete drinks Gatorade, right? That’s the purpose of those commercials to get that in your head. This is how broad and all-pervasive mimesis operates. Humanity, for Girard, would be completely unrecognizable without it.**And for Girard, our mimetic natures – the extent to which we are socially determined – is what differentiates us from animals and the main direction of human evolution from ape.**  
    This direction of evolution, is not, as commonly thought, the increase of our ability to reason and grasp truth. After all, Girard would say, other animals engage in truth-seeking behaviors as well – there’s echolocation, there’s tapping into magnetic fields, there’s night vision – these are all truth-seeking activities. But we are the only animals who create gods, who tell stories, who spin up fictions, who would go to war for an abstract conception of honor which we can neither taste, nor smell, nor touch, who would trade food and shelter for pieces of paper, who would die for myths and gods that clearly never even existed. Animals are the sober ones. We, are the nut jobs. What makes us unique, for Girard, is not our ability to determine truth but our capacity to believe in lies in so far as others around us do as well.  
    For the modern mind, this is a deeply alien conception of human nature. And it opens a Pandora’s box of questions: what does it mean to protect individual freedom if, we, like co-vibrating violin strings, are never truly free to begin with? How can we follow our own authentic desires if every part of our psyche is so helplessly external in its origin? How is the democratic process not as arbitrary as the whims of a single dictator, if we are so easily influenced and swayed by the mob? These will have to remain questions for now – wrestled with over the course of the next 7 lectures – because mimesis presents us a much more pressing and threatening problem in this evolutionary story that we must now turn to.
    
    Girard’s apocalyptic conclusions begin with a rather innocuous observation: mimesis.  
    What defined, for Girard, **our evolutionary breaking away from our great ape cousins** is not because of reason, it’s not truth, it’s mimesis – our gradually increasing capacity and tendency for imitation.  
    
    Humans are social animals through and through, prone to this type of co-vibration. Just as strings on a violin aren’t independent, neither are we.
    
      
    
    **Mimesis**
    
    **is the fundamental capacity and tendency to gain access to the subjectivity of others as well as to reproduce objective cultural** _forms_ – in other words, mimesis is what constitutes us as social beings and makes us different from other animals.