But history since Christ cannot only be interpreted as a rupture but also as a strong continuity with pagan society. It is continuity in the first and weak sense, in that the Christian revelation takes time to work in the world. The demythologization takes time because mythology has been with us for so darn long. Even Christianity itself, according to Girard, became mythologized, succumbing to this inertia. The past 2000 years has been a gradually waning off of religion for the human race. But it is a continuity in a deeper and much more interesting sense because the building blocks of human nature have not changed. Everything that we’ve discussed on the lectures on psychology, mimesis, mimetic desire, metaphysical desire, mimetic rivalry, our need for catharsis, all of that remains constant.

To put it succinctly then, what has ruptured is our social historical conditions. Culture is fundamentally different – we protect victims now whereas they used to be persecuted. We value truth now whereas we used to believe dogmatically. But what is continuous then are the people within those cultures, their yearnings and capacities, their psychology and needs. And the key interplay between the break in culture and the continuity in psychology will be the hidden motor driving these two final lectures.

If you consider that the cultural conditions we have been freed from are in some sense natural to the human condition – in the sense that we naturally create religion, we naturally scapegoat – and thus the conditions we are in now as unnatural, it is readily intelligible why so many problems of modernity take on the form of hypocrisy: persecution under the banner of protecting victims, rigid adherence to scientific dogmas under the guise of free intellectual exploration, or the most derivative of inventions packaged as the most radical innovations.

The core problems of modernity that we will explore in this lecture take on the shape of hypocrisy because we live in a fundamentally Christian culture that identifies and tries to correct the flaws of our natural psychological tendencies and as a result has to go against those natural tendencies. It is this incompatibility then between our cultural ideals and our natural tendencies that leads to hypocrisy. We are no longer living in a cultural environment which we have evolved and adapted to.

**0:10:44.2 DP:** Yeah, I’ve always liked the line from the biologist E.O. Wilson who says: “The real problem of humanity is the following: we have Paleolithic emotions; medieval institutions; and godlike technology.”

**0:11:02.5 JB:** I think that quote is apt and getting to the point if we consider culture to be a type of technology that we’re really forcing ourselves to live up to these cultural ideals which are some form of technology that we really can’t achieve.