- The Failing Societies
    
    Of course, the prestige of certain myths will wane over time, whether it’s corruption internally or challenge externally. And when the rituals and prohibitions completely lose their grasp on a society, when they’re incapable of fixing a society, **then the process is repeated all over again.**  
    Mimetic contagion, founding murder, divinization, institutionalization. And so, pagan society, all the way from hominization, our evolution from ape, exists in this cyclical view where you have a founding murder, it becomes institutionalized, the institutions after a long time lose their prestige, and then a new founding murder with its own set of myths and institutions are needed again.  
    •
    

- The New Founding Murders: new moral paradigm grounded on unanimity
    
    And we should understand each turn of the scapegoat mechanism, each foundation and institutionalization, as a singular moral paradigm shift.  
    These are events that are so cataclysmic, so world historic, with the depth so low and the resolution so miraculous, that they can’t help but through the associations in their stories alone, set up the fundamental framework for a new moral paradigm.  
    They set up associations of good and evil that are grounded on nothing but unanimity itself.  
    •
    

- Christian moral paradigm
    
    And adding on to what you’re saying, I think this could be a good example of what it means to live inside of a paradigm, because right now we’re living in the Christian moral paradigm. And in this Christian paradigm, ideas like human rights, which are themselves downstream from the idea of imago Dei, which says that every human is made in the image of God. And from that idea, you get the contemporary values like equality, love, compassion, and those three values stand in stark contrast to the **Greek values, which they held so highly of honor and courage**. And so you can clearly see that there’s been a 180 in terms of the differences between the pagan paradigm that we used to be in and the Christian paradigm that we’re in now.  
    •
    

- last moral paradigm shift
    
    I think that is quite a good example of a moral paradigm, that we are given in each paradigm these fundamental core concepts grounded on unanimity about what good and evil is. And in this case, it’s the Christian concepts, and from them flow a lot of conclusions like human rights, like you just mentioned. But we don’t even need to go that far to have an understanding of what living in a moral paradigm means. I mean, just look back to our last large world historic cataclysmic event where the Axis powers were expelled and anything associated with the Axis powers, especially Nazism, is just completely defined as the root cause of evil. In the last lecture, you mentioned how the futurists, because of their association with the Nazis, is completely off the table. But I think this expands far beyond aesthetics and much more than just aesthetic preferences were determined by this last moral paradigm shift. For example, all types of reactionary thinking is completely out of bounds today. It’s outside the Overton window today. In the academy, there’s only progressives with a minority of conservatives. And to this day, I haven’t met a reactionary professor yet. Or take another example, any semblance of racial discrimination, even if it is much more innocuous than, say, class discrimination, is completely unacceptable because racial discrimination calls to mind associations with the Nazis and their horrendous crimes. And even something such as science, there are entire practices like eugenics that once had incredible prestige around the world. I mean, in the beginning of the 20th century – UCL had a chair of eugenics. Theodore Roosevelt and Nobel laureates were supporters of eugenics. But that is now completely out of bounds because of their association with the Nazis.**1:17:18.2 JB:** Precisely, all of these examples that we’ve provided is what it means to live in a moral paradigm, that we are just given these fundamental substratum objects of good and evil. And anything associated with the good is good. Anything associated with evil is completely off of bounds. And so just as growing up in a culture listening to Sophocles’ Oedipus will make patricide and incest completely out of bounds and will legitimize other practices like the pharmakos, so do our moral paradigms ground our key assumptions. They become the lens through which we interpret all phenomena.  
    If you think about it, this is quite an unsettling thought. Are our practices just as cruel as the killing of twins in shamanistic societies? Are our rituals just as pointless as human sacrifice of the Aztecs? Are our desires just as arbitrary as the Romans’ fetish for conquest? Are our judgments just as unreasonable as the pharmakos of Greece? Are the fundamental building blocks of our society still grounded, like societies of yore, only on the prestige and unanimity of some deceitful and violent founding murder?  
    Fortunately, the answer is no. Or at least, not exactly. We are not part of this cyclical pagan story anymore with founding murders, failing institutions, followed by more founding murders and institutions ad infinitum. A single force in history has taken us away from this cyclical trajectory and projected us into a linear time. This force saves us from myth and the sacred, but with a religion of its own. It rescues us from violence and lies, but in doing so threatens the very foundations of worldly peace. That force is Christianity. The topic of our next lecture.