**1:02:32.5 JB:** We’ve discussed the mass collapse of all forms of institutions – ritual, sacrifice, prohibitions, the breaking of laws and capitalism – but the most frightening collapse of institution is the institution of war. You may be surprised that I would even call war an institution. After all, when we think about institutions, we think about laws and codes, rules and regulations. This in our minds has nothing to do with war, because we conceive of war as about winning at all costs, disregarding any codes and rules and laws, regardless of the means and the form which victory takes – biochemical weapons, terrorism, torturing prisoners, weapons of mass destruction, this is what we think about when we think about war.

Girard’s point is that war was not always like this. Think of how the Iliad ends, with a 12-day truce for the burial of Hector. Think about how Greek city-states fought each other over land with phalanxes in a very ritualized manner. And at least before the Peloponnesian War, most of the battles between these phalanxes were very contained and ritualized. It’s like a rugby match almost, where rival leaders agreed where and when to fight. And the fight ended not when one side was totally exterminated, but when one side started to lose ground – there are always these implicit rules governing every aspect of the fight. Even in modern day, I think we still have hints of this institution of war. For example, the impromptu Christmas truces in World War I, where rival soldiers came out of their trenches to play soccer with people that they were just trying to kill days ago in no man’s land.

Girard understands warfare as being composed of two elements: the abstract concept of war, which is what we are used to now, and the frictions of war that turn it into an institution. To understand this abstract concept of war, Girard asks us to turn to the military theorist and general, Carl von Clausewitz’s famous On War. I quote: “War is nothing but a duel on a larger scale… War is an act of force, and there is no logical limit to the application of that force. Each side, therefore, compels its opponent to follow suit; a reciprocal action is started which must lead, in theory, to extremes.” This metaphor of a duel is very alarming, because a duel is defined by instant escalation. Whether by sword or by pistol, the duel is often over in a matter of minutes, if not seconds, with one or both parties dead. Both of you deploy all your abilities and forces to immediately exterminate the opponent. That’s the logic of the duel. For Girard, as for Clausewitz, the abstract concept of war – the governing logic of war – is none other than this instant escalation to extremes, the Hegelian duel – which only ends in death or complete domination.

But of course, in reality, wars do not happen like this – there are stalemates, there are withdrawals, there is de-escalation, there are peace treaties. What prevents actual war from conforming to its abstract concept of unending escalation to the extremes are frictions – frictions that prevent both parties from fully deploying all their forces at once. The idea is this. If violent reciprocation is simultaneous, then spirit dominates, and you are completely caught up in that logic of vengeance. Yet if there are frictions that prevent rival factions from deploying their forces, then they can have time to de-escalate and cool off. It’s very much like personal rivalries, where taking time away from your rival is very important for spirit to cool off and being able to use reason. In like manner, rival nations need frictions to help them gain lucidity to de-escalate. And I think there are two types of frictions that prevent rival armies from deploying their forces at once.

First are technological frictions – the terrain you have to traverse to get your troops onto the battlefield, the long gap of communication that plagued armies of old, etc.