**0:47:50.9 JB:** But just like love, Girard thinks that modernity is often hypocritical when it comes to truth, just as persecutions now proceed under the banner of the concern for victims, dogmas are now disguised as free inquiry. Specifically, Girard thinks that we are idolizing and making a religion out of reason and science. I quote: “It is because we have wanted to distance ourselves from religion that it is now returning with such force and in a retrograde, violent form…” (He’s talking about how fervently people believe in atheism these days.) “In this, it will perhaps have been our last mythology. We”believed” in reason, as people used to believe in the gods.” Girard’s claim here is that there’s been an intellectual founding murder since the enlightenment. What we have expelled is religion and what we have divinized is reason and science.

The best example I can think of, of us deifying science is this: in the old days, scientific rational activities – geometry, astrology, music – all wanted to snuggle close to divinity. For example, think about how musical composers wanted to show that they were capturing the harmony of the heavens. But today, the divinities of yesteryear are trying to snuggle close to science. I took a course in college on a Buddhist meditation and it was named Contemplative Science. My professor tried really really hard to argue that the Buddhists were doing science. I was also walking down New York I think on 5th Avenue and I saw a banner that said, Fifth Church of Christ, Scientists. The fact that the literal deities of yore are trying to cozy up to science is perhaps part of this divinization of science that Girard is talking about. But what’s the problem with reason and science gaining such an immense prestige? What’s wrong with that?

The first and most obvious problem is the one that we’ve been discussing for this entire lecture series. If we deify reason and attribute to it too much power in the human psyche, then we’re designing society for what we want humans to be and not what they actually are.

But that’s not the only problem. Second, by being deified, science can become unquestionable and can justify terrifying political actions. In the same way that appealing to Scripture or the edicts of the Catholic Church justified terrible political actions on the prestige of Christianity, Girard is deeply worried that political agendas are now wrapping themselves up in a veneer of science to be equally unquestionable.

Girard’s worry is that science isn’t independent from narratives and fashions and thus is also susceptible to mimesis and all of its problems – it’s not as objective as we think it to be. Here’s the passage from an anthropologist, A.M. Hocart, that he always likes to bring up. I quote: “The first Gibraltar [half-man, half-ape] skull was discovered in 1848: it passed quite unnoticed. The Origin of Species appeared in 1859. It wasn’t till men had become thoroughly used to the idea of man’s descent from an ape-like creature that the skull was brought out of its obscurity, in order to become a link in the evidence. It wasn’t the direct evidence of a man-ape that converted biologists. Rather, having been converted by comparative evidence [Darwin’s narrative essentially], they set out to find direct evidence in order to confirm their deductions… It took thirty-five years of The Origin of Species to set them really looking. Then Dubois went out to find the ape-like fossil and found it. Since then discovery has succeeded discovery, and the illusion of direct evidence has taken possession of the minds of anthropologists.”

This is an incredibly damning story for Girard, because it shows that even if science can objectively access the facts, that only gets us so far. The fact of finding a half-man half-ape skull did nothing and didn’t change our understanding of the world at all. And it wasn’t direct facts that convinced biologists of man’s descent from apes. It was the power of Darwin’s narrative – a narrative that’s grounded on tangential facts like the evolution of bird beaks, but not the direct evidence like humanoid skulls. Not unlike many Christians then. The biologists believed before they saw the direct facts. We need a theory to situate facts in. We need a narrative to convince us and those narratives, even if they are checked by the facts, are incredibly susceptible to mimesis. This is why even in the most objective of sciences, there are intellectual fashions.

**0:53:03.7 DP:** Your point about Darwin and Gibraltar reminds me of the Planck principle, which comes from the scientist Max Planck, who said that science doesn’t progress because people change their views, which is what most people think. But rather what happens is that, each new generation of scientists, they have different views, different ways of seeing the world, different beliefs. And then as old generations die and pass away, new ideas are accepted because new scientists come into power. And then that, that changing of the guard is how scientific consensus changes.

**0:53:36.9 JB:** That’s very interesting. And I think what both this Planck principle suggests, as well as the Gibraltar example from Girard, is that science is governed less by facts and rational agents changing their mind objectively as we are led to think, and that these interpersonal mechanisms of mimesis actually plays a much greater role, even in very objective science.

**0:54:00.2 DP: I think so.**

**0:54:01.8 JB:** But Girard has another concern for science that this Gibraltar example brings up. Even more damning for Girard. The Gibraltar example shows that science doesn’t really truly have an objective command over those facts independently of narratives. Think about it like this. The first humanoid skull was ignored when the narrative wasn’t there. And when the narrative was there, people began seeing them everywhere. I think it was Peter Thiel who had this line as an undergrad: “If we look for oppression, we’ll find it everywhere.” But I think it’s not just oppression. Even objective facts become distorted by the narratives we hold. We are not truth-seeking creatures, but creatures who are able to believe in myths, lies, and narratives if others around us believe them as well.

This is what worries Girard, that science, like reason, is quite impotent and turns out to be just as susceptible to narratives and mimesis by deifying it. We turn something we should all be very, very suspicious of into something unquestionable that can justify atrocities. For example, the terrible eugenics movements of the 20th century were draped with the veneer of science. Eugenics was a tremendously popular and prestigious discipline. It wasn’t a pseudoscience at all. It was supported by Nobel laureates like Hermann Müller and political leaders like US President Theodore Roosevelt. There was even a chair for eugenics in University College London. Not only was the discipline of eugenics grounded on the most prestigious of sciences of the day, not the least of which being Darwin’s theory of evolution, but some of the most important developments of statistics flowed out of eugenics research. The fathers of eugenics, many of whom prestigious professors at UCL, invented the correlation coefficient significant tests to better measure populational differences in the same way that Newton had invented calculus to better understand physics. Hopefully, you can see Girard’s point here. What is really a political agenda is dressed up in science. Indeed, the facts are that there does exist populational differences between races, but what people chose to do with those facts, that is really narrative dressed up in science.

Perhaps what is more damning for Girard then is that we didn’t stop eugenics because of a scientific victory, because we defeated it on the fields of facts. We stopped because the narrative of eugenics had lost its prestige by being so closely associated with the Nazis. In fact, much of the same science continued under a different guise. Britain’s Annals of Eugenics was renamed Annals of Human Genetics. American Eugenics Society became the Society for the Study of Social Biology and the magazine Eugenics Quarterly was renamed to Social Biology. Let me be crystal clear here. Girard is not a eugenicist. In fact, the opposite. He is terrified of eugenics and showing us the dangers of deifying science.

Eugenics, unfortunately, does not stand alone in disastrous narratives disguised as science. History is littered with examples of scientific hubris, ranging from the comical to the disastrous. Think about Malthus in the 18th-century reasoning that living standards would go back to subsistence because population grows geometrically while food increases arithmetically. Think about the 1970s where there was an entire wave of a ridiculous dubious climate science championed by the Times, the New York Review, Columbia, Brown. They were all publishing articles on an inevitable ice age. Here’s another example. In January 1970, Life, reported and I quote: “Scientists have solid experimental and theoretical evidence to support the following predictions: In a decade, urban dwellers will have to wear gas masks to survive air pollution. By 1985, air pollution will have reduced the amount of sunlight reaching earth by one half.”

In many of these examples, it’s not that the science was bad – people weren’t faking numbers – but that the science and facts are extremely limited and open to a whole host of narrative interpretations. The reason certain narratives get selected often has nothing to do with science at all: it has to do with mimesis, prestige, shock value, career advancement of the scientists, grants, political agendas.

What is so hypocritical, Girard thinks, about our deification of science is that we disguise subjective opinions, public dogmas, mere narratives with the prestige of objectivity. The reason that it is dangerous to deify science is the same reason it was dangerous to deify the Catholic Church. Just as the European conquest of the Americas was, at least partially, legitimized through the appeal to Catholicism in spreading the gospel, today we too need to legitimize our political pursuits with a sprinkle of reason and a dab of science. And just as whomever used to disagree with the Catholic Church we called heretics, we call those who disagree with politically charged, questionable science as anti-science, someone whose positions we don’t even have to contend with. When deified science becomes a blocker to truth and genuine inquiry, because it is a conversation stopper – therein lies the hypocrisy.