**0:28:08.5 DP:** Building on what you’re saying, I’m astonished at how effective law can be at ending the escalation of violence. There was a situation recently where Jeff Bezos sued Elon Musk for like $3 billion or something. And what’s amazing about this is in the past, before we have these systems of law, if there was a feud between two of the wealthiest and the most powerful men in the world, it could escalate into something really bad. But what happened was Musk won the lawsuit and Bezos put out a press release and simply said, “Congratulations, I lost fair and square,” and they moved on. And it didn’t end up becoming an issue because the feud was settled in a court of law which everybody respects.

**0:28:52.4 JB:** I think Girard, like you, is also a bit astonished and finds it laudable of how well law works. But he warns us that we give up a lot for this efficacy. Girard thinks that not only do we have a monopolistic force on violence, but that the state must assert itself everywhere to establish law. It must govern every type of action to snub out even the beginnings of violence, because violence can begin anywhere. Speeding tickets, prenups, business deals, employment contracts, inheritance, divorce settlements, defamation penalties – compared to pagan society, where rituals were quite localized, law has to assert itself in all aspects of our lives and in all these areas it is always backed by total violence.

Law then becomes a quick way to end a large amount of relationships so that they don’t get out of hand. What had been functions governed primarily by relationships – inheritance by parent and child, family by husband and wife, business ventures by co-partners – is now less so governed by those relationships and more so by the intermediary of the state through law. This idea of law as a way to end relationships is perhaps why societies with a strong rule of law can feel so cold and atomized.

I think you can get a taste of a society being predominantly governed by relationships and one primarily governed by law by looking at the transition from secured employment relationships to the gig economy that we’re seeing today. Whereas say working long hours is often out of social forces – you want to motivate the employees you don’t want to let your teammates down – in a regular company like let’s say a startup where there’s a lot governed by relationships. The amount of hours you work in a gig economy like driving for Uber or getting food for DoorDash is solely determined by cold hard compensation. And whereas say taking care of your employees is a responsibility for an employer, the gig economy leaves a lot of that burden onto the worker. And even in this subtle transition from employment relations governing job relations to the gig economy governing job relations, we can already see a microcosm of the larger shift towards law – there’s more freedom, but less social congeniality; there’s more things that are governed by contracts and not relationships.

Law, then, is not only a descendent of ritual but it’s also a descendent and continuation of prohibition. We’ve given away the big prohibitions like caste systems but only to find ourselves surrounded by a million small prohibitions no matter where we look.

**0:31:41.6 DP:** What you’re saying is making me think of an example that drives me insane and it’s one of the things that has surprised me the most about the professional world. I’ve noticed that when we’re hiring people for write of passage or doing some interviews, there are so many things that I’m not allowed to say. And they’re all so specific. And what bothers me about this is that there isn’t like this big code of morality that’s intuitive, that’s natural, that’s embedded in the society that has room for bending and all these sorts of things. But what happens is that with modern employment law, you need to know about this little thing, this little thing, this little thing. And I have to keep them at the top of my head the entire time. And I feel like I can’t even treat somebody like a human being when I’m interviewing them. It’s this atomization of virtue that drives me insane where instead of talking to somebody like a friend, somebody like you know them, you need to treat them like a potential lawsuit. And it’s terrifying, but also there’s so many laws that it’s impossible to keep up.

**0:32:42.9 JB:** That’s exactly the total restraint that Girard thinks we have to give up for efficacy. Not only do we need a monopolistic force of the state governing our relationships, but now we also need the state to be in the middle of all of our relationships, all of these different employment questions and employee-employer relationships. Every little detail has to be managed by the state. And the only way the state can do that is through these cold objective laws that surround you in every angle. This is what we’ve given up for the efficacy of law.

However, Girard also observes that this total restraint also paradoxically allows us to behave more freely towards each other. Girard has this to say: “Primitive societies do not have built into their structure an automatic brake against violence; but we do, in the form of powerful institutions whose grip grows progressively tighter as their role grows progressively less apparent. The constant presence of a restraining force allows modern man safely to transgress the limits imposed on primitive peoples without even being aware of the fact. In ‘policed’ societies with law, the relationships between individuals, including total strangers, is characterized by an extraordinary air of informality, flexibility, and even audacity.” Girard’s point in this quote is that, yes, David, you are right, our relationships are much colder and less intimate, but this paradoxically also frees us in some sense, that we have an aura of informality and flexibility in our relationships with other people, that these two things, the coldness, the atomization, and the freedom, are joined to the hip, so to speak. For Girard, then, what makes it possible to live peacefully with each other as equals, what enables us to not have the large pagan prohibitions like caste systems, is a totalizing violence that legislates and erects prohibitions in every aspect of our lives.