**01:06:58.0 JB:** The second are cultural frictions – the rituals and prohibitions in war, what made war into an institution. You see, up until modern times, there were often things you must or could not under no circumstance do to your enemy, even in the context of war, even if it meant giving up an easy victory or facing certain defeat. These frictions often delayed violence and gave both parties space to de-escalate.

And we don’t have to go back to the Greek phalanxes to see war as an institution governed by these rules. We can look at something much closer, the gentleman’s wars of the 17th and 18th century. These wars were called gentleman’s wars because there were so many implicit agreements that everyone respected. Let me just give you a few examples. During the wars of the 18th century in Europe, it was usual for armies to campaign in set seasons – usually from March to September. And so with the onset of autumn, armies would go into winter quarters and many officers would head home. This notion of war, that it’s like some kind of NBA season, is ludicrous enough, but what is more is that for many officers to go home on this off-season, some would have to travel through enemy territory, and usually their enemies granted them safe passage.

Let me give you a more specific and incredible example. In gentleman’s wars, to kill officers via assassination was considered scandalous and not honorable. The famous rifle corps commander, Colonel Patrick Ferguson, had this to recount in 1777 when he was deployed to America from the British Empire to quell the rebellion. I’m reading from his journal here, I quote: “We had not lain long when a rebel officer, remarkable by a Hussar dress, passed towards our army, within 100 yards of my right flank, not perceiving us… I ordered three good shots to steal near to them and fire at them; but the idea disgusted me. I recalled the order… I could have lodged half-a-dozen of balls in or about him before he was out of my reach. I had only to determine; but it was not pleasant to fire at the back of an unoffending individual, who was acquitting himself very coolly of his duty; so I let him alone. That day… one of our surgeons… came in and told us they had been informing him that General Washington was all the morning with the light troops, and only attended by a French officer in a Hussar dress, he himself dressed and mounted in every point as above described. I am not sorry that I did not know at the time who it was.” Ferguson let the rival chief commander, George Washington, go because it was, “Not pleasant to assassinate.” And after learning who it was, he wasn’t sorry for letting him go. That’s like if the US had bin Laden at its crosshairs but decided to call off the drone strike because it was a Sunday and it’s not good to kill on the Lord’s day. That is how strong these cultural frictions were in the 18th century. War was much more like a competitive team sport – filled with passions and emotions but with clear boundaries that few transgressed.