**1:17:47.1 JB:** Girard isn’t exaggerating when he says we are living in the end times. Prohibition and ritual have broken down and we are without our old tools to limit violence. The best we can do is law and capitalism, which are insufficient katechons – decreasing the actuality of violence while increasing its potentiality. Unlike sacrifices of old, there is no real peace. This potential energy, if it hasn’t already, will engender war at the point where law is impotent, and capitalism has channeled our rivalrous instincts – global trade. And such a war, without cultural nor technological frictions, would see a rapid nuclear escalation that brings about literal apocalypse.

So what ought we to do in such an apocalyptic age? How should one live in the end days?

Let’s begin with what Girard thinks we shouldn’t be doing. We shouldn’t try to fix the world through collective political action. Indeed, Girard has an inherent suspicion of all collective actions, because we necessarily lose a part of our authenticity by being so immersed in a group. Forceful political action is almost always deceitful to justify violence or at least expulsion. But Girard does not categorically reject political action despite these downsides, because there are certain movements that are still worthy of engagement despite of them – perhaps freeing the slaves.

Girard’s heed, therefore, against political action isn’t categorical, but contingent on our social-historical moment. He believes that nothing is left to be done on the political level. Girard, like Hegel, believes we are in the end times. We have realized, to a large degree, equality, freedom, and truth, which are the ultimate ideals humanity can strive for. But contra Hegel, Girard also believes that it’s these exact forces of equality, freedom, and truth that are also the forces causing this monstrous buildup of violence. It’s because we’ve gotten rid of caste systems that competition is building up. It’s because we’ve given up an unjust sacrifice that we have no resources to resolve violence. It’s because we’ve given up silly prohibitions that wars have taken a total character. And it’s because of our desire for truth that we can no longer believe in any noble lies that can bring lasting peace. This is the eschatological paradox. The conditions that make possible the kingdom of God on earth undifferentiation, the state of equality that we’re all in now, is also the conditions for mass violence. Political action is impotent because we are already at the most ideal state. If we can’t love each other now, we can’t love each other ever. Girard declares, I quote: “All men are [already] equal, not just under law, but in fact.”

We are already in the perfect social-historical conditions. There’s nothing left for political activity to do. What is required of us in such perfect social-historical conditions is a radical transformation of spirit, where we give up our metaphysical desire and in doing so, renounce violence and learn to love others. This deeply personal individual transformation, Girard calls conversion.