**00:21:41.0 JB:** Despite the similarities between rituals and legal systems that they both prolong reciprocation as well as clearly demarcate what violence is justified and what isn’t, legal systems and rituals are also very different – throwing a child in a volcano every full moon is radically different than sentencing a criminal according to an agreed upon law. So what is the difference then?

To answer this, let’s look at the most law-like ritual and see what is still missing. The most law-like ritual that Girard brings up is a ritual enacted by the Chukchi – an indigenous people of the Arctic who roamed in these separate different tribes. The ritual goes something like this, if one person in my tribe kills a person in your tribe, then I as the tribal leader will choose someone in my tribe to kill to hopefully settle the score. Importantly, I never choose the person who actually did the killing. I must choose someone else who is completely unrelated to the initial incident.

Do you see how this, more than sacrifice or carnival, is more like a legal institution? It’s done explicitly in response to an explicit wrongdoing instead of carnival that occurs on a set schedule, and it has the same tit-for-tat punishment that we are used to with modern law following an explicit series of rules. But it’s also radically different: the biggest point of difference being that it’s not the guilty party who is punished, but someone innocent, an innocent bystander on your own tribe, on your own team, who isn’t related, that’s who gets killed. That is what shocks our modern intuitions about this example – why isn’t the original instigator punished? While we’re at it, why do none of the rituals that we talked about seek to punish the original instigator but instead punish a bystander, like in sacrifice, or no concrete person at all, like a festival?

Girard’s answer is that the guilty party can’t be punished, because they are the ones who are socially charged, who have people rallying both against and for them. They are in the very center of the mimetic contagion. If you kill them, you might spawn a whole new line of reciprocal vengeance. Recall our discussion a few lectures ago about how the victim needs to be far from the social order, and that’s why foreign rulers like Oedipus or Marie Antoinette make such great scapegoats – because you kill them and it just ends there. They don’t have that many family or friends in the social order to avenge them. A bad scapegoat would be like Agamemnon sacrificing his daughter, because the daughter is at the very heart of the Spartan power system – she’s too close to the social order, and as a result, that did spawn a whole new path of vengeance.

This is why the Chukchi can’t punish the person who is guilty, whom entire tribes have rallied around, because he is at the very center of the social nexus. Everyone’s eye is on him. This is also why in sacrificial rites like the pharmakós, a criminal or outcast is used, and why in Carnival, the violent actions and intentions aren’t directed at anyone in particular.

So why can our judicial system punish the guilty person? This is Girard’s answer and the entire punchline – because we have an entity with a monopoly over violence, the state. I quote: “There can be no true ‘administering of justice’, no judicial system without a superior tribunal capable of arbitrating between even the most powerful groups. Only that superior tribunal can remove the possibility of blood feud or perpetual vendetta.” We can punish the guilty party because we are not like the Chukchi with separate roaming tribes. We are one big tribe with an entity that has a monopoly over violence, which is the state. If someone harms you and you don’t like the sentence they were eventually given and try to take justice into your own hands, then you will be threatened with the state’s vengeance and violence in turn. Girard’s surprising conclusion is that for law to work the way it does now and so effectively, where the guilty party is punished, there must be a totalizing force handing out the punishments.

Let me give you an analogy. I played a lot of basketball growing up, and when you’re playing a friendly game of casual pickup there are often disagreements of whether you went out of bounds or traveled, but there’s no referee to arbitrate between who’s right or wrong. And so one of the only ways you can decide peacefully and efficiently who is right is essentially a ritual, what we called “Ball Don’t Lie”. You have your claim that you didn’t travel or you did travel or he didn’t travel or he did travel, and you shoot a three pointer. If it goes in, you are right, and if it doesn’t, the opponent gets the call. This is not unlike a ritual like trial by combat: to agree not on a solution, but a solution for a solution. It’s only in serious matches with a referee who has a monopoly over violence – in this case, the ability just to kick you out of the game – do we actually get judicial judgments. Of course, the funny thing is that everyone who does ball don’t lie and practices that ritual knows that the ball do lie – whether your three pointer goes in or not has nothing to do whether your claim is just, whether he actually traveled or not. Just like whether you win your duel or not has nothing to do with your innocence in a trial of combat. But before there’s a monopolistic force, the best one can do are rites like “ball don’t lie.”

Just as referees are much more effective than “ball don’t lie” – our judicial system is much more effective than ritual institutions of old in making judgments and limiting reciprocal violence because we actually take the guilty party out of commission. After all, the killer is still on the loose in the Chukchi tribes, even after the ritual. And if the other tribe, the one who’s wronged, does not feel cathartic enough, then the killing might still continue. Under this light, the judicial system conforms much closer to the logic of vengeance than even ritual does – because it’s intent on punishing the guilty party.