**01:14:56.0 JB:** Of course, cultural frictions aren’t the only ones that have disappeared. In the age of instant telecommunications and paratroopers, we can deploy our forces in much more rapid succession. But nothing beats the nuclear bomb and its ability to instantaneously deploy all of one’s violence at once. What is unique about the nuke isn’t its singular destructive force – the firebombing of Tokyo, the Mongol mass murderers are all comparable to the devastation of a singular nuclear strike. What is unique about the nuke is that it forces rivals to utterly destroy each other at the first glimpse of provocation. Unlike firebombing or a Mongol Horde that takes time to maneuver through terrain, there are no frictions to unleashing your entire nuclear arsenal. You just gotta press the button. Before the nuke, nations fought wars like a boxing match, taking time to maneuver, resting in between, with fatal blows rare and often taking a long time. The nuke allows nation-states to fight wars like a duel – instant fatal escalation. It’s worse than a duel because it allows the dead party to shoot the person who is alive – because even if you nuke my entire landmass to oblivion, my nuclear submarines can still avenge me post-mortem.

Framed in this light, Girard’s worries of apocalypse is less theological speculation than déjà vu. On October 27, 1962, a Soviet submarine armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo was located and targeted by an American carrier group, dropping signaling depth charges intended to destroy the submarine. At the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis, the crew had lost contact with Moscow for days and thought that a new war had broken out. The crew was considering whether to fire the nuke, believing they were under attack. This submarine required all three senior officials to agree to launch the nuke – two of them decided to fire – only one officer’s stubborn refusal prevented an almost certain nuclear attack and likely world-scaled Armageddon. This is how close we were. The will of one man was all that stood in the way.

This is why Girard felt with the bomb, we truly do live in an apocalyptic time where if a war were to begin, it could quickly conform to its abstract concept, escalating instantaneously to the extremes.