Let’s move on to our second topic of discussion. Everything we’ve discussed so far has dealt with a positive species of mimesis, where model and subject converge, where rivals become more like each other. However, there’s a whole other species of mimesis that pushes us away from others. This is the negative phase of mimesis.

The logic of metaphysical desire is to pursue objects associated with those who have a fullness in being. A natural continuation of this logic then, is to avoid or distance oneself from objects associated with those we conceive as having a deficiency in being.

**We both want to be like the cool kids, but also be different as far as possible from the social outcasts, the people who we think are unacceptable.**

You see this in our aversion to certain aesthetics from the 20th century. I think back to the Italian Futurists. They had this beautiful art and architecture. Their architecture is grand and majestic. It represented power. And then their art was very optimistic, these blues and reds that represented this technological optimism. And it was wondrous and inspiring. But what happened was after World War II with the Nazis, we rejected anything that looked like fascism, looked like a government that was just too strong, too authoritarian. And so what happened is no matter how beautiful a certain aesthetic is, if it smells like Nazism, if it smells like fascism, we reject it outright

futurism was not rejected on its own grounds because it was ugly or because it carried the wrong connotations of technological progress, but it was rejected on the grounds of who it was associated with.

The association is the key point there. Exactly.

And I think that would be the Girardian interpretation as well, that this negative drive to distance ourselves away from those we think are lesser, or in this case, evil, is just as powerful and prevalent as the positive drive to be more like those we think greater than us or fundamentally good.

moral high ground by dissoociation why symontanesolu becoming exactly the rival

And the personal example I can give here is of a college acquaintance who was an economic progressive. When he was a freshman and we just met, he was extremely passionate about the distributive justice. And every time I would meet him, he would go on and on and on about the mistreatment of the poor and what we could do better. However, as I got to know him a bit better, he confessed to me that what was motivating his progressivism wasn’t a universal benevolence, a concern for the poor, but a localized resentment, a hatred of the rich. See, this acquaintance came from a middle-class family but grew up with upper middle-class peers and was always made to feel poor. His orientation of values against wealth was not for its own sake, not any more than our orientation away from futurism was for its own sake, but to get back at his wealthier peers. By painting money-making as immoral, he found himself on the moral high ground. The funny story is, he’s now in a career as an investment banker because he never really had a problem with money at all. In fact, the only reason he renounced wealth so heavily and so fervently was because he wanted it so much and was deeply resentful that he couldn’t get it. This is the psychology of the negative phase of memetic rivalries, and it’s the exact inverse of the positive one: **it’s to, at the surface, reject the values of the rival, but in secret strongly desire them.**

In American Psycho, Bateman affirms the values of his other bankers, resenting them secretly, whereas my friend rejects the values of his peers, but admires them secretly. This is a fine, thin, and often traversed line indeed – **the closest of partners often become the worst of enemies.**

If the perversion of the positive phase of mimetic rivalry, and here think to Bateman and American Psycho, is pettiness and trivi**ality, bickering about the fonts of your business cards, then the perversion of the negative phase is hypocrisy – rejecting money while you secretly desire wealth.**

- Conforming to Contrarianism
    
    This negative species of mimesis adds a completely new dimension of what it means to say that man is a social creature. Even when we break away from a group, that itself can be a deeply socially determined action.
    
    And with this intuition, Girard wants to tear down what he conceives of as the Romantic lie. The lie goes something like this, **at the bottom, we are all individuals, whatever that means, with a core of what we can call the “authentic self.” And then layered on top of this true individual are layers and layers of social constraints with its origins external. The way to access authenticity under this model is by “following one’s heart” with a radical breaking free from the group.**
    
    Girard says “not so fast.” This breaking free from the group can be just as socially determined as rigid adherence. You’re confusing difference for autonomy, distance for independence, and originality for freedom.
    
    When I asked my college acquaintance, after he confessed to me that his progressivism stemmed not from a belief of the ideas themselves, but largely due to a social resentment of his peers, I asked, “Well, isn’t that a huge problem that you didn’t form this opinion independently?” But to my surprise, my acquaintance answered, and in stark contrast to what he had just told me, he responded, “Why I did form this opinion on progressivism independently. After all, all of my peer group are economic conservatives. I am the only progressive. I am different from them. How could I have been determined by their opinions?” This here then is the lie of romanticism, that difference means authenticity – that all we have to do is to peel away the effects of the group and we will find our authentic cores.
    
    The reality, however, is that we can just as easily be socially determined by rejecting a group as we can by conforming to the group. Mimesis operates positively and negatively. Becoming a progressive because you were resentful of the conservatives is no less socially determined than becoming a progressive out of peer pressure from progressives.
    
    I think my acquaintance could only have thought otherwise because we fetishize difference in our culture. Our models in modernity are all of radical breaking-aways from the group. The underdog going against the big brother, the rebel fighting outside the system, the daring entrepreneur disrupting an old industry, the starving artist creating something radically new.
    
    Too often, however, I feel like we are conforming to contrarianism, that we’re seeking difference for difference’s sake. Just as how a Confucian in Chinese antiquity might have doggedly adhered to tradition just for the sake of tradition, we, I think with no less rigidity, try to rebel from tradition for no other reason than rebellion.
    
    I think Marlon Brando’s character, who plays a motorcycle gang leader in The Wild One – a movie in the ’50s – captures this perverse sentiment well. There’s a scene in that movie when Brando’s character is asked, “What are you rebelling against?” He’s at this bar, he’s this really cool, rebellious leather biker jacket, and he just lets out a weary sigh and responds, “What do you got?” He doesn’t stand for anything, his values are not held for their own sake any more so than the conformists are. He simply wants to be different from whatever you present to him. Whatever you give him, he’s going to rebel against it. That is the perverse sentiment within modernity.
    
    Man is shown to be a social creature through and through. If you take one thing from Girard’s psychology, it is this: the most powerful and explanatory element within the human psyche is our sociality. Our values, our political orientations, aesthetic tastes, and even philosophical positions are inevitably dependent on and heavily influenced by others in deep and often very unconscious ways. This influence is so pervasive that not only can our movements towards a group be socially determined, but so can our movements away from the group.
    
    I think we can understand Girard’s psychology as elevating this social part of ourselves, what I’ve been calling spirit, over reason. Spirit is stronger, it’s more persistent and more important to us. Reason often pretends to be its steward, but in reality is its lawyer and spokesperson, engaged more often than not in simple post-hoc rationalization.
    
    In this view, we are not rational, truth-seeking creatures, but animals who willingly believe in lies, in so far as others around us do as well. After all, other animals engage in truth-seeking all the time – echolocation, tapping into the magnetic fields, night vision – but we are the only ones who create gods, who tell stories, who spin up fictions, who convince each other of lies. We are not individuals, but a collection of co-vibrating violin strings. Our behaviors always have direct consequences for others.
    
    Framed in this way, Girard’s psychology mounts a formidable challenge to the very ground of modern social theory. What does it mean to protect individual freedom if we, like co-vibrating violin strings, are never truly even free to begin with? Are what we consider personal decisions – aesthetic preference, sexual orientation, gender identities, familial roles, music tastes – are these really a question of self-expression, or should we examine them primarily due to their mimetic effects on society? How do we legitimize democratic political consensus when people don’t seem to vote for the common good? They don’t even seem to vote for their rational own self-interest but pick allegiances based off of spirited, tribalistic social forces.
    
    This is the Pandora’s box of questions that Girard’s psychology opens up. Unfortunately, they will have to remain questions for now, but this much I can reassure you. The social world we are about to step into over the next four lectures is one completely alien to our intuitions. It is a world – where groups can only be reconciled through violence, where the foundation of worldly peace is always lies, where truth brings war, not peace, and where the historical expansion of justice, equality, and freedom begets apocalypse.
    
    When you will inevitably be shocked by Girard’s social conclusions, more often than not, it is due to a difference in psychological assumptions. The key in understanding Girard’s social theory is to interpret it as built upon a psychology that elevates Spirit over reason.
    

> [!important] Nessary Evils
> 
> - necessary evils: The Psycho-Social Pathologies of Man
>     
>     Girard treats what we commonly think of as abnormalities within human psychology and society as necessary occurrences. Fetishization, bipolarity, alienation, masochism – pathologies that we think only the few unfortunate among us experience – Girard, believes is the common predicament. These psychological pathologies are not a radical break, but on a continuum for Girard with regular psychology. Put provocatively, we are all to some degree masochistic, bipolar, fetishizing, and alienated.  
>     In like manner, social pathologies – oppression and inequity – which we only think plague the most unjust of societies, will receive the same treatment – all of human society are oppressive and inequitable, the only difference being of kind and degree.  
>     This then is our next and last conversation of this lecture, to understand the necessary evils that Girard’s psychology injects into individual life as well as society, to understand the social and psychological pathologies of man.  
>     •
>     
> 
> - Fetishization
>     
>     Let’s begin with the psychological pathologies, and most of these will be old news.**The first pathology is fetishization, and I would describe fetishization as gaining a morbid attraction to an object, disproportionate to the intrinsic value of that object**.  
>     I think that’s quite a standard understanding of fetishization. And once we frame it in this light, we can see that it is none other than metaphysical desire.  
>     As the example you gave last lecture of Kanye’s $100 white t-shirt goes to show, through metaphysical desire we give objects an undeserved surplus value because of certain models who mediate our desires.  
>     In so far as we experience metaphysical desire – and Girard believes that almost all of us do – we are fetishizing creatures.  
>     •
>     
> 
> - Alienation
>     
>     The second psychological pathology of alienation directly flows from this point.  
>     One popular understanding of alienation championed by thinkers like Feuerbach and of course the later Marx is to describe it as the experience of externalizing and being alienated from the best or the most important qualities of ourselves. We project what is most important to us on an external object, and thereby become alienated from these qualities. Feuerbach’s famous example is the Christian God – he berates Christianity because it makes us project the best qualities of man – innocence, love, truth – onto a distant God, and thereby robbing ourselves of those self-conceptions.  
>     Here, metaphysical desire is the channel and culprit of alienation as well. **We take the key ideals that we are striving for – reality, persistence, and self-sufficiency – and project and externalize them onto objects that we chase.** The very act of desiring for Girard is, in and of itself, the very act of externalizing our most prized and desired qualities onto an external object.  
>     You know that makes me think of a line from Naval Ravikant, and I think he says: “Desire is a contract that you make with yourself to be unhappy until you get what you want.” And this happens with clothing all the time, where often we’ll set our eyes on something, and we’ll want it so badly that we just won’t even feel happy until we have that thing. And we think that once we get that thing, we’ll feel happy or worthy or successful – as if it’s the salvation that we’ve been waiting for, looking for all along – and then until you get it, you’re an incomplete person.  
>     That’s precisely right. And Girard’s point is that the very thought that only when I get that object will I feel whole is the cause of you not feeling whole in this very moment. The very act of metaphysical desire causes a deep lack. We say: in the example you’ve provided, only if I obtain this amazing object can I and will I experience this fullness in being. Of course, that’s also saying that the fullness of being does not reside within me now. It resides externally on that object over there. Because we all experience metaphysical desire, we all, Girard believes, are constantly alienated in this way.  
>     •
>     
> 
> - Bipolarity
>     
>     And because what is most precious to us is alienated away, residing in an external object, we also necessarily experience the next psychological pathology: bipolarity. Bipolarity is a pathology characterized by oscillating manic and depressive phases. In the manic phase, we feel a surplus of pride, like we are on the top of the world. And in the depressive phase, we feel utter and complete despair.  
>     Mimetic theory also offers a reasonable explanation for this. Because the external object holds so much weight, you experience mania when you are close to it, and you experience despair when you are far from it. This oscillation between pride and shame, between mania and despair, is in fact, for Girard, what defines metaphysical desire.  
>     • Masochism  
>     The last psychological pathology that we are always doomed with, if ever so subtly, is masochism. Masochism, commonly understood, is associated with gaining sexual excitement for pain, but I think that there’s a larger form of masochism as well that actually extends much broader: and that is to confuse the difficult with the good. And I think our mimetic tendencies brings this confusion about in two ways.  
>     First, think back to the deceitful quality of metaphysical desire we described last lecture – how the object can never satisfy us because it’s not an object that we seek, but the being of the model. A natural consequence of this fact then is that whatever objects we obtain, we are going to be dissatisfied and reason that all objects like this aren’t suitable objects for metaphysical desire. As a result, the only objects that maintain their allure – that we can still believe have the power to confer this fullness in being – are necessarily the ones that we haven’t yet obtained because of their difficulty.  
>     For example, it is easy for most people to reject the simple idea and silly idea that, say, buying candy bars is the key to our ultimate satisfaction. Why? Well, because candy bars are very accessible. Anyone who believes so can simply buy a pair of candy bars and correct their belief through experience. The belief, however, that a million dollars is the key to our ultimate satisfaction is much more widely held because the object is much more difficult to obtain and, thus, harder to invalidate. And I do think this is quite explanatory of how prestige works in society, that there is an intimate connection between prestige and difficulty. Certainly, not all difficult-to-obtain objects are prestigious, but almost all prestigious objects are difficult to obtain. Why? Because the illusion of prestige can only be maintained if most people don’t have experience of the object directly, which would make them recognize the object’s deficiencies. This makes us start forming a however unconscious connection between the difficult and the good because everything easy to obtain shows itself to be deficient.**This connection – between the difficult and the good – is further bolstered second by the very form of mimetic rivalry.**  
>     We’ve discussed extensively today how the form of rivalry increases the desire for the object. If throughout my entire life the value of the object is always correlated with the intensity and amount of competition surrounding it, then I could gain an association between the trials and tribulations associated with competition and the value of the object itself – and thereby confusing the difficult and the good.**The idea may be something like this. If a person develops a strong romantic relationship to potential partners every time there is significant competition, then perhaps he will start forming a strong association with the value of a partner and how difficult they are to court. Such a person, if pushed to the extreme, may exclusively desire partners who aren’t just competed after but unavailable altogether. These people do exist, and the scary thought is that Girard thinks we are not drastically different from them but on a continuum with them.**  
>     •
>     
> 
> - Oppression: take them out of the mimetic game entirely
>     
>     The necessary pathologies that stem from Girard’s psychology are not just limited to individuals but are also social. One such social pathology is oppression, and the best way to make sense of it is to understand Girard’s commentary on eating disorders. Let me quote Girard: **“The people with eating disorders are not the people with a religious hang-up, the traditionalists and the fundamentalists, but the most ‘liberated’. I remember one of the Seinfeld shows on NBC that brilliantly captured the ‘normality’ of bulimia nervosa, eating and then throwing up afterwards in our world. At the end of a meal in a New York restaurant, a young woman goes to the bathroom to vomit the large plate of spaghetti she has just finished eating. She announces this to her companion, another woman in the same tranquil and matter-of-fact tone as in bygone days she might have said,”I’ll put on some lipstick.” …**  
>     Compared to the young woman on NBC, the decadent Romans [who were also bulimics] were innocent sensualists. They, too, were eating and vomiting in turn, but for themselves only and not for anybody else. They were really looking out for number one. Our modern bulimic is eating for herself, to be sure, but she is vomiting for others, for all these women who are watching each other’s waistlines. Her radical freedom is synonymous with her enslavement to the opinions of others.”  
>     Girard’s point here is not gendered – I think it applies to male bodybuilders who compulsively inject harmful steroids, as it does to this example of bulimics – and it is this: oppressive prohibitions, such as coverings for one’s body or preventing certain types of people from doing certain activities – can serve a legitimate, albeit paternalistic end: to limit certain objects from inciting competition, to take them out of the mimetic game entirely.  
>     Once we liberate people from these oppressive prohibitions, as this example shows, a deeper and more subtle form of oppression can take place. We can be just as compelled to do activities against our own interest, (but seemingly out of our own volition) due to mimetic rivalries.  
>     This idea may be distasteful to modern intuitions, but let me provide an example I think we can all relate to: why do certain parents prohibit their children’s social media usage, maybe especially teenagers? Because, from one perspective, this is a very oppressive act to limit a species of freedom. But I think, and I think many of us will agree, that it is oppression to prevent a greater form of oppression – the mimetic frenzy that teenagers often get caught up in, which can, even more, take away their agency.  
>     Modern man, for Girard, fully liberated, is subject to oppression precisely where he thinks he has liberty. Through mimesis, the liberating “can” quickly degenerates into an oppressive “ought”. Whatever objects we are given liberty to pursue can become an object of mimetic rivalry, coercing us through a radically different channel. And so, Girard believes, oppression will always plague society. It either exists explicitly in different forms of prohibition, like gender roles and caste systems, or it exists more subtly through mimetic competition, coercion disguised as liberty.  
>     •
>     
> 
> - Inequity
>     
>     If the threat to our treasured ideal of freedom was not enough, so too will equality be threatened. Inequity, much like oppression, will be a social pathology that we can’t escape from. And the reason is quite simple: in so far as we remove the real forms of inequality – caste systems, gender norms – **where we consider groups of people as being essentially different, we go from external mediation to internal mediation by bringing people closer.**  
>     But as I’ve argued extensively in this lecture, proximity is the precondition for comparison, for jealousy, for mimetic rivalries. And so, as the real distance between people shrink, people feel more prone to compare, and as a result, the subjective experience of inequity balloons.  
>     This, of course, is none other than the famous Tocqueville Principle that Alexis de Tocqueville observed after coming to America. I quote Tocqueville here: “When inequality is the general law of society, the most blatant inequalities escape notice. When everything is virtually on a level, the slightest variations cause distress. That is why the desire for equality becomes more insatiable as equality extends to all.” And I think we are living in just such a moment now. At a time when the inequalities between genders and races have never been so small in American history and continue to decrease, the cries of injustice and the painful experience of inequity seems to only increase.  
>     And so, not unlike oppression, we are forced to choose between real and psychological manifestations of inequity: either we have real inequality, differences in essence, or we continue to close down the differences among peoples only to inflame our comparative and competitive drives, and therefore making the subjective experience of inequity much more suffocating.
>