**0:41:50.8 JB:** This transition from catharsis and prestige to the threat of violence spawns both a change in who the focus of punishment is, and also changes the very philosophy of punishment itself. In rites, the focus of punishment is the wronged party so that he can get his cathartic release, and the philosophy of punishment is retribution – that the wronged person deserves to get even in some way. This is also Nietzsche’s conclusion as well. I quote Nietzsche here: “To what extent can suffering balance debts or guilt? To the extent that to make suffer was in the highest degree pleasurable. To the extent that the wronged party exchanged for the loss he had sustained, including the displeasure caused by the loss, an extraordinary counterbalancing pleasure, that of making suffering a genuine festival.” In rituals then, it’s about the wronged party experiencing pleasure and catharsis, because without the threat of state violence that is what will end reciprocal violence.

In the legal system, the focus of punishment is the guilty party – to take him out of commission and break the chain of reciprocity. The philosophy of punishment is guilt – he, in some ways, deserves to be punished, not for the pleasure of the wronged party, but in and for itself.

Girard naturally draws a somewhat relativistic conclusion on modern conceptions of justice as punishing the guilty party. Girard’s point is that we didn’t start punishing the guilty party because it was more just. We started doing it because it was more effective, and then we backed our way into this notion of justice as punishing the guilty party. He has this to say: “Our penal system operates according to principles of justice that are in no real conflict with the concept of revenge. The same principle is at work in all systems of violent retribution. Either the principle is just, and justice is therefore inherent in the idea of vengeance, or there is no justice to be found anywhere.” His point here is that either justice is revenge, in which case our system is the most just because we conform closest to vengeance or justice is just some relativistically made up term – Contra Plato, Girard isn’t particularly concerned with justice, because some abstract ideal of justice isn’t the concern for rituals or law, it’s about containing reciprocal violence, it’s about making sure the group survives. In the absence of a monopolizing force, the most effective way is to create cathartic rites that does not punish the guilty party but gives the wrong party release – if you want to call that justice, fine by Girard, justice really isn’t the concern here, the existence of the social group is at stake.

Law then, for Girard, is an institution descended from rituals that occupy the function of both ritual and prohibition in modernity. There are three large differences between rituals and law. First, law requires an all-pervading, all-powerful, monopolistic force to function. Second, whereas rituals prevent further violence from prestige and catharsis, law prevents violence with the threat of more violence. Third, rituals are primarily done with the wronged party as its focus. The logic of punishment is retribution. Laws are designed with the guilty party as its focus, the logic of punishment is guilt.

The key thing to take away is that law is the katechon, that which contains violence and apocalypse, but it is only effective at stopping violence with the threat of more violence – this will be pivotal for Girard’s arguments on apocalypse, because at certain points the dike is going to break, the dike of law is going to give way. Law will break precisely where there is no central monopolistic power, namely in international affairs and global trade. With that, let’s move on to our second institution of modernity – capitalism and trade.