**0:22:07.9 JB:** Girard is not being naive here. As his sober analysis of international care suggests, he does not think that all that appears to be compassion and love actually takes on this noble Christian form of agape, this genuine undiscriminating concern for the other. More often than not, it’s more that our society has rendered compassion prestigious and people are pursuing it out of vanity – we might call this theater because it’s putting on a display for others. And this is what Girard has to say. I quote again: “Even the renunciation of violent mimetic desire cannot spread without being transformed into a social mechanism, into blind imitation… Rather than an authentic exit from mimetic desire then there is mimetic submission to a culture that advocates that exit.” Girard’s point here is that just as we have conformed to stoning victims before, we are now conforming to helping victims. The action may be different in content, but the form of that action is still the same: conformity of mimesis.

The acts of theatrical love that Girard has in mind are people who just play along with the cultural currents — “Yeah, sure, I’ll volunteer my time.” “Sure, I’ll donate to this cause.” “Sure, I’ll post a social media post to spread awareness” — not because they have a grounded belief, but simply because it’s the fashion of the times and they want to be seen on the right side of history. What appears to be agape here then is really Eros. They are doing it for their own vanity and they only help the victims that are fashionable to help.

There’s a deep critique here of contemporary culture, that humans have not fundamentally changed – we haven’t let go of our pride in favor of love as individual choices. Or even more strongly, if you drop the same people who are sheepishly protecting victims in another cultural environment, they would readily join the stoners. But this is also a deep praise of our current society. After all, we shouldn’t expect people to behave otherwise. That’s what being mimetic creatures means. In any social community, the amount of authentic individuality is relatively small compared to mimesis and its forces. So we should be glad that people are conforming to as noble an ideal as love.

Girard’s comments here on this theatrical display would be his most urgent warning on the topic, if not for the fact that there is an even more pernicious mutation of love that threatens to delegitimize love altogether: That is hypocrisy.