You are predisposed to acquire a language, black slate, and content of language is [[Craft/Mastercraft/Intelligence/State of the Art/Complexity/Complex/Complexity/Evolution/Cultural]], culture is how you inherit ancestral trait.

[[Craft/Mastercraft/Intelligence/State of the Art/Philosophy/Epistemology/Literally False, Metaphorically True]]
[[Nurture Fights the Last war]]

[[Tacit (Not)]]
All humans have language.

We can tell self from other, and can distinguish self as subject (“I cooked for her”) from self as object (“she cooked for me”). We use facial expressions that are both general and nuanced, which include happiness, sadness, anger, fear, surprise, disgust, and contempt. We don’t just use tools; we use tools to make more tools. We live in or under shelter. We live in groups, usually with family, and adults are expected to help socialize children. Children observe elders, and copy them. We also learn by trial and error. We have status, governed by rules stemming from kinship, age, sex, and beyond. We have rules of succession and markers of hierarchy. We engage in division of labor. Reciprocity is important, both in the positive sense—barn raising for neighbors, exchanging gifts—and in the negative—retaliation for perceived wrongs. We trade. We predict and plan for the future, or at least we try to. We have law, and we have leaders, although both may be situational or ephemeral. We have rituals, and religious practice, and standards of sexual modesty. We admire hospitality and generosity. We have an aesthetic, which we apply to our bodies, our hair, and our environment. We know how to dance. We make music. We play. It took so long for us to become who we are today. If you look deeply into the history of life on our planet, you can see how these universals emerged over hundreds of millions of years, and once you understand this, you will see why change, especially rapid change, isn’t always such a good thing.

Most populations knew little about life beyond their borders—they knew only of their nearest neighbors. Seven hundred years ago, only a very few people were connecting with others halfway around the world, sharing ideas, food, language. And those few were restricted to the speed of sail and horses, rather than nearly the speed of light. — Humans have retained the vast majority of these innovations from our history, from brains and bone to agriculture and boats. We breathe air and generate heat. We have efficient hearts, which sometimes fail us. We have limbs and hands and feet. We are dexterous, agile, and social. We walk upright, which allows us to carry things long distances. We have just a few children at a time, and those children learn from their elders, and from each other. Our facial expressions may unite us; our language less so. We use tools to make more complex tools. We live in groups and have hierarchy. We engage in reciprocity—exchanging both gifts and blows. We cooperate to compete. We have law and leaders, ritual and religious practice. We admire hospitality and generosity. We admire beauty, in nature and in one another. We dance and sing. We play. Our differences are fascinating, but our similarities make us human