**0:41:36.5 JB:** This lack, this drive to render ourselves whole, to exist in great measure, to enhance our being, to bolster our identity, to fulfill our self-conception -- I'm trying to get at what Girard is saying from as many angles as I can -- these are the driving forces of metaphysical desire and the key motivational faculty of all humans.  
  
But how do we achieve this being? After all, it's so darn abstract, metaphysical desire takes on forms as a pursuit of objects in the broadest sense of the term: wanting to climb Everest, building a unicorn company, studying in an Ivy League, wanting a particular car, dating Sally instead of Susan, enjoying a fancy restaurant. This should not be a foreign concept to our this-worldly, achievement-focused consumer society: we want to acquire objects to bolster our identity. **And the way we go about choosing objects is imitating individuals whom we consider to already possess this fullness of being, celebrities, parental figures, entrepreneurs, an outstanding co-worker. We take on their desires as our own, the objects they value as the objects we too strive for. The faulty logic here being that it must be the acquisition of these objects that grant them the fullness in being.**  
  
**Girard's central thesis is that what often appears to be a subject pulled towards an object due to the intrinsic value of that object is really the subject wanting to acquire that object to be like a model.**  
  
What we are really after isn't the object, but the being of the model. Put differently, we want objects because what they say about our identity vis-a-vis models. If there's one thing that you should take away from Girard's observations on metaphysical desire is this: Whereas we think of desire as unidirectional from subject to objects, it is actually triangular, proceeding from subject through model and then to object. The strength of our desires often have little to do with the objects themselves, but with our relationship with the model -- our own sense of lack and their fullness in being.  
  
Because what is at stake in metaphysical desire is our identity, it is the strongest drive in the human motivational repertoire. It's quite obvious when we are motivated by such a drive because we become obsessed and compulsive and we think that achievement, that getting the object which metaphysical desire yearns for, will fully transform us. In different stages of our lives, metaphysical desire usually directs us towards a limited and discrete set of objects.  
  
Girard's point is that in every period of life, we are always oriented towards something, that there are these objects in each period of life that take on a disproportionate weight, such that you define progress as inching towards the object, and whenever it slips away from you, your heart just thuds and you feel existential despair, you are totally enamored and caught up with the object.  
  
**0:44:44.0 DP:** This reminds me of the world of celebrity advertisements. I remember seeing Kanye West's clothes for the first time, and what happened was I walked in and I saw them on the rack, and I thought they were ugly; I didn't think that they looked comfortable. It didn't look like they would even fit well. They honestly looked like they belonged in the $5 section sales rack at the local Marshalls. But then I started seeing ads for the Yeezus brand and the same clothes that I once shunned now seemed so inviting to me, so appealing. And what I realized in that moment is that clothes aren't just about functionality, which is what I'd always thought clothes were, but also about the person that they make you become.  
  
**0:45:27.3 JB:** I think that's exactly the right types of examples to think about when we're talking about metaphysical desire and mediation.  
  

- - Ne like Mike
    
    **Celebrity advertisement is exactly I want you to have in mind. But I just wanna be clear here, this also happens with a much closer circle as well, it doesn't have to be someone as glorious as a celebrity, but the values of a parent, the desires of the coolest kid in school, the tastes of the most popular co-worker, these too have the same type of gravitational pull. But on the topic of celebrity advertisement, the one line that gives it all away for me is the slogan of Michael Jordan’s sneakers, when he sells his sneakers, he says, "Be like Mike." What he's promising you isn't just a product, it's not a utility, but the being and prestige of Michael Jordan so that you too can have a small piece of that as well. It's not jump like Mike, it's not score like Mike, the advertisement doesn't promise you the most important thing about basketball shoes, whether it's the lightness or the fit or the bounce or the grip, it's promising you something you want so much more: being. "Be like Mike."**  
      
    As this example shows, it's not just any object from the model that gains this allure, it has to be close, it has to be proximate, it has to be unique to the model -- in short, we have to think that the object is core to the model's being. This is what Girard has to say. Let me give you a quote, "The object is to the mediator what the relic is to a saint. The rosary used by a saint or his vestments are more sought after than a medal which has simply been touched or blessed by him. The value of a relic depends on the closeness to the saint. It is the same with the object in metaphysical desire." Girard's point here is that metaphysical desire only directs itself to the objects we think are core in some sense to the model's fullness of being. After all, when we want to, "Be like Mike," we don't run out and shave our heads bald, we go out and buy basketball shoes, even if being bald is just as a quality of Michael Jordan as wearing his shoes.  
      
      
    Of course, I've been using objects in the widest sense possible here, going far, far beyond mere possession and consumption. Take something as intimate as romantic or sexual interest. After all, what could be more private and valuable in and of itself than love or sex? Yet even in this domain, we aren't freed from mediators, our desires aren't our own. Girard here would point to Dostoevsky's famous book, *The Eternal Husband. The Eternal Husband* tells the story where a protagonist admires his Don Juan friend and is clearly mediated by him. The protagonist clearly considers this Don Juan as having a fullness of being, so much so that the protagonist brings his new wife to this casanova Don Juan figure in hopes that he would seduce her, in hopes that he would show his desire for her, and by doing so, validate the protagonist's own decision of marrying his new wife. Granted, this may be an exaggerated case of mediation, but Girard would say that we all experience a tempered, yet nonetheless similar version of this in our own romantic lives. After all, it's all too common for us to find a previously unappealing partner attractive when we've learned that there's plentiful new competition. Dostoevsky's *Eternal Husband* then is but a mere exaggerated form of what many of us do really experience in our day-to-day romantic lives.  
      
    If even in the extremely personal and intimate domain of love and sex our desires are heavily informed by those of others, then the externality of desire is even more true in less personal domains: career choice, political orientation, aesthetic taste, or something as innocuous as writing style, the way that intellectuals write. Girard, in some of his essays, tells us that clarity is not fashionable these days. I think what he's saying here is that there's been a succession of incomprehensible writers in the past few hundred years -- perhaps Hegel and Adorno chief amongst them -- who've added great prestige to writing obscurely. And, as a result, many contemporary intellectuals also eject clarity to be more similar to their models.  
      
    Clearly, the domain of mediation expand beyond consumption and span the whole scope of the human condition. The implications of this phenomenon -- that our desires are triangular, more due to the people associated with the objects than the objects themselves -- ripple across Girard's theory. I will highlight four qualities of metaphysical desire that warrant it being the dominant object of analysis in Girardian theory.
    

- The Malleability of Metaphysical Desire
    
    **0:50:14.6 JB:** First, metaphysical desire is extremely malleable and it explains the varied presentations of human culture. Its malleability lies in the abstract nature of its ideals: reality, persistence, self-sufficiency. Based on who our mediators are, these ideals can take form in a kaleidoscope of ways. If I grew up with a Don Juan as a father, perhaps my desire takes the form as a desire for sexual conquest. If I spent my childhood with philosophers, perhaps my desire manifests as a desire to write treatises. If I was educated in Imperial Japan, perhaps my desire takes on the shape of a desire to die for the emperor. Metaphysical desire is the desire that can be, through mediation, morphed into almost any concrete desire.
    

- The Power of Metaphysical Desire
    
    **0:52:09.8 JB:** The second quality of metaphysical desire is that it is powerful. Insofar as we are motivated by it, we start to lose our agency. The idea is quite simple: the force of metaphysical desire is so strong because so much is on the line. We aren’t after just a momentary experience, but what an object says about us that will echo through time, our spirit, our being, our self-conception is at stake. And thus I think it becomes quite easy to identify when we are primarily motivated by metaphysical instead of physical desire. The former almost always manifests in a compulsive form. I’m thinking about the fervorous religious rituals of pagan societies, the rush to buy buds in the heights of the tulip mania or the rush to buy internet companies in the dotcom bubble. Metaphysical desire underlies most activities that we feel like we need to do – to date someone, live in a neighborhood, hold a specific job, go to a specific school – without which we can never feel whole. If we have that sense of need, that’s a good symptom, a good indication that we’ve been taken over by metaphysical desire.
    

- Meta physical desire Strong enough to subside
    
    Even stronger then, metaphysical desire explains the most puzzling parts of other cultures – the parts where people seem to go against their own interests: their own appetites and their own experience. Take this as an example. We look quite puzzlingly at early Christian aesthetics, with self-imposed celibacy, castration, and mutilations. We are also confused by aristocrats who refuse certain tactics in war that would grant them certain victory because these tactics are ignoble. Those in the future perhaps will puzzle at our modern elite who seem to work harder the richer they get instead of using it to enjoy leisure. These phenomenon are hard for an external observer to decipher because they seemingly go against the individual’s immediate sensual interests. However, they become readily understandable under the light of metaphysical desire – a malleable and more powerful force in our motivational repertoire that is fundamentally not concerned with experience, appetite and interest narrowly construed, but our being.
    

- The Deceitfulness of Metaphysical Desire: un ending treadmill
    
    **0:53:30.7 JB:** However, even if we are able to obtain the objects metaphysical desire so desperately wants us to have – we will still not feel whole. Third then, metaphysical desire is deceitful, it results in an unending series of failures, this fullness of being will always elude us. The reason that metaphysical desire is deceitful is simple. What metaphysical desire aims at (an object) and what it really wants (being) aren’t even the same type of thing, we are oblivious that this intense desire we feel for the object is because of the model. Instead, we consider the object to be extremely desirable because of its intrinsic qualities. After all, when I watch Jordan’s commercials, I gain a direct desire for Jordan’s shoes – I don’t go consciously thinking that I only like these because they’re associated with Michael Jordan – this triangular root is hidden from us.
    
    Think back to the example of romance, when we find a previously uninteresting prospect suddenly become attractive, as soon as we find that a formidable rival desires them, well, nothing about the prospect has changed, yet our desires have increased many fold. Clearly then, such an increase in desire cannot be pointing at anything intrinsically real from the object since the object has not changed at all. Indeed, the strength of metaphysical desire is not correlated to any qualities of the object, it takes upon a reality of its own based on the desirability of the model. And I think Kanye’s $100 white t-shirt that you just gave is a great example of this, and I think that it wouldn’t have mattered if he had sold white t-shirts or blue boxers or red socks, it’d be equally alluring because the objects don’t matter. And if the objects don’t matter, then clearly the objects will not be able to satisfy our deepest desires.
    
    And I think this is quite plausible. When you speak with people who’ve had metaphysical desires, believing that after they do X, they will be fulfilled – getting a job, dating a person, buying an object – it almost always ends in disappointment. This is why we so often lose interest in objects after acquisition, they do nothing to change our being, and we start seeing them for what they truly are, just objects.
    
    Yet, because of how malleable metaphysical desire is, when we are inevitably disappointed, we don’t see through the lies of desire, we simply conclude that the object we just had was not the right one, and go on the chase for other new objects. How many times in your life have you heard something like this? “Getting into an Ivy League is fine and all, but you know what will really make me happy? Ten million dollars.” Or: “Getting a car. That car I was just so excited about three days ago, that’s nothing. You know what would really make me happy? That house that I don’t yet have.” Or maybe a total 180: ”making money, having a house, having nice cars, that’s all necessary, but what will really give me lasting satisfaction is being a world-renowned actor.” Because of how malleable metaphysical desire is, people don’t renounce desire itself and it’s simply re-directed towards the next set of objects that have maintained their allure, and so they go on one wild goose hunt after the other.
    
    **0:56:44.8 DP:** To your point about cars and houses, one of the weirdest things about the human condition is the way that we think that buying something, one thing, is just gonna satiate us forever. In high school, I was a big, passionate golfer, and I wanted new putters, the same one that Phil Mickelson had, and it was gonna make me feel like Phil Mickelson It was The Odyssey #9 Putter. And I remember being so excited for this thing to arrive, as if it was just gonna take care of my golf game forever. And I got it, I was super excited. Three days later, it didn’t mean much to me anymore. I want a new driver, I need a Tiger Woods driver. And so I get that thing. And it was this cyclical repetition of wanting something, being so excited, getting it, and feeling this emptiness. And even though I can laugh about this story, I still feel it all the time, I get that same disappointment, I still desire things all the time.
    
    **0:57:33.8 JB:** Perhaps what you’re saying is that even if you rationally know that getting this new set of drivers, or whatever set of objects you’re desiring now, will not fundamentally transform your being, you still can’t but help desiring that next set of objects that you have not obtained yet.
    
    **0:57:50.3 DP:** Drives me crazy.
    
    **0:57:52.5 JB:** I think Girard has a really great metaphor to describe this phenomenon. Metaphysical desire is compared to a mirage with a seductive promise: the place you were just at, well, that’s not it, that’s not it. Don’t worry. But just a few more steps, and I will give you that which will replenish your entire being and quench your thirst once and for all.
    
    Metaphysical desire is a mirage that leads us on one wild goose hunt after the other.
    

- The Ungovernability of Metaphysical Desire
    
    **0:58:18.4 JB:** What makes all of this so much worse then, is the last quality of metaphysical desire: it is ungovernable. That is to say, that metaphysical desire does not fall under the jurisdiction of reason. This ungovernability stems from its deceitfulness. If I desire something physically, there’s something concrete that I can point to. Reason can examine it, it can weigh its trade-offs, and potentially tame or redirect it. But the goal of metaphysical desire, however, is abstract and elusive. Furthermore, this pursuit of the being of the model is always hidden from the subject disguised as a passion for the object. Reason does not even know where to begin, much less be able to quantify and “weigh” it.
    
    But even if we had rational understanding of our predicament as your club example and your buying sprees shows, the ungovernability also stems from the strength. Metaphysical desire tends to have such strength as to override the dictates of reason. The platonic ideal of the reasoning part of the soul, holding the reins of the spirited part of the soul, Girard thinks is an illusion. The spirited part of the soul, when it is inflamed, is the strongest part and commands reason. Think about instances of anger. Reason does not direct us, but merely becomes a spokesperson for the spirited part of us while pretending to be its steward. If Nietzsche says, “He who has a why can bear with almost any how,” then we must add to him, “he who needs a how can make up almost any why.” Insofar as through mediation, you need to obtain some objects – the how – the reasoning part of your soul becomes this lawyer who comes up with reasons — the why.
    

Metaphysical desire then is the key focus of Girardian psychology because it represents a motivational force that is infinitely malleable, exceptionally strong, continuously deceitful, and often ungovernable – it is a flexible, powerful, dynamic and compulsive force that is responsible for humanity’s greatest achievements, most terrifying disasters, and just about everything notable in between.

Let’s pause and reflect on the territory we’ve already traversed today. Girard’s psychological project is to identify the key psychological motors of man. Within the realm of human behavior, he focuses on mimetic behavior because it is the key normative authority. Within that, he focuses on mimetic desire because it carries with it an acquisitive force, and within that, mimetic desire is shown to have twin components, a desire to experience — physical desire — and a desire to be —metaphysical desire. Metaphysical desire sees us chasing for objects, not for their own sake, but for what they say about us, for the self-conception they confer, and the fullness of being we expect to receive upon their acquisition. It is this drive which Girard sees as the dominant force within our motivational repertoire, if you will.

Metaphysical desire – malleable, powerful, deceitful and ungovernable – renders us compulsive, chasing one shiny object after the other, all while being led on by the false promise that salvation is just around the corner. We will always be disappointed if and when we obtain the object, caught in a perennial, repeating trap of tragedy and farce.  
Everything we’ve said so far today only relates to people primarily or solely motivated by metaphysical desire. Of course, we can choose basketball shoes based off of their price and utility instead of their prestige. Of course, we can choose romantic partners based on our taste and not the opinions of others. And of course we can form our own philosophical beliefs independently of intellectual fashions. This is the distinction I tried to draw between physical and metaphysical desire. Only when we are primarily motivated by the latter, to gain a fullness of being, are we subject to this terrible fate. If we are primarily motivated by physical desire, then we are indeed quite sober and are after the object for the object’s sake.

**metaphysical desire is the root of all sin.**