Adaptive evolution improves the “fit” of creatures to their environment. This is well established. In a rush to make evolutionary biology an empirical science, though, biologists prioritized defining _fitness_ such that it could be easily measured. We biologists settled on a definition that is almost synonymous with _reproduction_. As is the case with many assumptions that ultimately fail, the belief that _fitness_ and _reproductive success_ were near synonyms was wildly successful at first, enough so that generations of biologists made great headway by simply treating them as one. All else being equal, a creature that is a better fit for the environment tends to produce more offspring, and when that is the case, biologists have excellent conceptual tools for unpacking the evolutionary process that leads to it. What happens when all else isn’t equal, however, and the creature with more offspring has cut corners in the pursuit of short-term fecundity? Under these conditions the ability of biologists to understand the story is compromised. If the harm done to fitness shows up quickly—if an individual animal produces many offspring, all of which perish in the winter—we will likely come to understand that it failed in an evolutionary sense. If, however, the descendants prosper for a fairly long time, but die off in the next drought, or the next Ice Age, there is a good chance biologists will botch our analysis of “success.”

Fitness is indeed often about reproduction, but it is _always_ about persistence. A successful population can ebb and flow through time. What a successful population can’t do is go extinct.

Extinction is failure. Persistence is success—and the reproduction of individuals is only one factor in the persistence equation.

But what does it mean to persist? Is it species persistence we are after? Do we count each population within the species separately? Is it an individual’s descendants we should be counting? Logically, it must be all of those things, and more.