In 1951, social psychologist Solomon Asch asked to what extent social forces alter people’s opinions. Like baboons, we definitely track what other people think. But to what extent does knowing what other people think change what we ourselves proclaim?

In what is now considered the classic experiment on conformity, Asch asked people a simple, factual question: Which of three lines is the same length as a fourth line? The question wasn’t difficult, and the answer wasn’t ambiguous. When, however, a “naive” participant was put in a room with several “confederates”—people in on the ruse—and those confederates provided identical wrong answers, only one quarter of the naive participants always resisted social pressure and answered correctly. The vast majority of naive participants succumbed to social pressure sometimes (although only a tiny fraction of participants gave the wrong answer every time).4

Unlike many classic psychology experiments, Asch’s has stood the test of time. It has been widely replicated, under a variety of conditions. Among other things revealed in the decades since Asch first did his work in the mid-20th century, women are found, in some studies, to conform at higher rates than men5 (which is in keeping with women being more “agreeable”). Conformity has a time and a place—like most traits, it is not simply worse (or better) than not conforming.

There is a tension between conforming and disagreeing in the face of apparent inconsistency. This tension is a hidden strength of humans—the push and pull between wisdom and innovation, between culture and consciousness.

Humans are generalists at the species level, but have tended to be specialists at the individual level. Historically, we have combined forces in social groups, such that in a single group, many people with distinct skills created an emergent whole, one in which generalist capabilities emerged even if all members of the group were specialists. Now, though, it is time to innovate, because change is accelerating, and the received cultural wisdom isn’t sufficient. Individuals themselves becoming more generalist—through learning skills across domains, for instance, rather than diving deep into only one—will help us in this endeavor.

It is important to _know_ what the group thinks, but that is not the same as _believing_ or reinforcing what the group thinks. In a time of rapid change in particular, then, it is important to be willing to be the lone voice. Be the person who never conforms to patently wrong statements in order to fit in with the crowd. Be Asch-Negative.